EAGV3 Session - 2026/05/16 10:46 IST - Transcript
Transcript
00:10:00
The Admin: Yeah, you have a sticky note on your wall. An is listening. All Good morning everyone. If you can hear me, just say hello.
Raghu Rammohan: I know.
Sairaj Nadaf: As open money will
Jeet: Hello.
The Admin: Good morning.
Jatin Pahuja: I
The Admin: And you should all have stick notes on your wall.
The Admin: All right, let's get started.
Ankit Biswas: Yeah, sorry if I didn't hear Yeah, those are some stickiness.
The Admin: What does it say?
Ankit Biswas: Mostly what I have to do, I have to learn prefab.
The Admin: Okay.
Ankit Biswas: I have to learn recursive your assignment. And office also somewhere.
The Admin: So now our recording has started and let's start. So today's session six. believe me it is going to be one of the most difficult session because of the assignment not to understand what we're doing. But this is the first time you're going to be struggling with actually getting the prompt right. I'm hoping that session 1 to five I've given you enough background on how to structure prompts and how to get the whole thing up and ready. But it is going to be tricky.
The Admin: So I really hope that you get the logic right and once you get the logic right you get the prompt right and if you get both of these right then you're really free to make any kind of agents this is the most important session because all the future architectures are based on this today we're going to be seeing what agents look like in multiarch architecture what are different kind of architecture are available and should you actually get married to a single architecture should you get married to a single is dangerous architecture is also dangerous So we need to understand on that. till now what we've been doing is the part one where we have a user and a user is talking to a AI agent and the AI agent essentially has two options either it can look at the memory or it can look at a tool and based on that it can take the next call. we have not yet tried to segregate the memory properly.
00:15:00
The Admin: Last session we did attempt in today's session we're going to go further and from the session seven and eight we're going to introduce complex mechanisms where we can fetch better and add rag as well but this is a very basic architecture and this architecture really cannot scale and the reasons you'll understand by the time you actually look at the assignment that is there then we have agents like this and this is where I actually want to drive your architectures also to and also want to make sure
The Admin: that you sort of start start making these architecture or make an architecture which becomes this kind of architecture right and you'll understand what I mean here what you're seeing is you have an agent user is talking to the agent agent is quering the memory and at the same time it can call a particular tool also but it can launch its own agent right now we have agent one and agent to shown here and both of these agents can maintain their own memory memory be consolidated memory artifact can be sent by the main agent to this guy. tools There might be some special skills with the agent agents have. but the point is we allow the agent to decide whether we have to call a particular agent or not. today in session six our agent does not have an option of not to call. That is something we're going to try and look at in the future. Our agent once given a particular job, it is bound to call a particular agent and it call that agent and gets a task done and then continues.
The Admin: But the right of calling the agent is there but not to call the agent. you'll understand as we proceed. So right now in session five we have one agent and internally it is you looking at a phone or what?
Pandurang Patil: Can you increase in zooming the screen? Thanks. Why I'm looking at laptop?
The Admin: Which laptop book air mini okay so in the last session we had agent 5 py it's monolithic it carried perception planning dispatch and…
Pandurang Patil: No, no, no. It's MacBook 13. No, no. As of now, not
The Admin: verification in a single loop we're going to be breaking that part now we'll have memory as a separate thing it is something that is going to be local you can store it you can fetch it after the run also if you decide It is something you can go and add details to and that is what is going to become sort of a personality capture sort of understanding what your preferences are your facts and other details as well. Then we'll have a perception. you're going to take some time to understand what perception actually is and we're calling it perception today. because the name is going to change in future but perception essentially mean understand the problem break it down understand whether problem was solved properly or not.
Shanmuga Suntharam: Come on.
The Admin: And that's the job only right it is going to pass on the job to decision which is actually going to decide what to do whether to call a tool whether have to call memory I've been given some information what do I do with it it's going to be decision action is going to be same as what we had last time which is NCP tool call where it goes online it goes to the MCP server gets a job done and comes back but the loop that we're going to be making is going to be talking amongst our memory perception decision and action and the flow is something that we control that's orchestration that is what lang chain and other guys providing We're going to see that is not the complex thing that is literally the loop that handles everything. The complex part here is going to be how do we attach the memory? How do we send a part of the memory to perception or how do we send a part of the memory to decision? Those things are not done in any of the other agent orchestration platform.
The Admin: They assume that you're going to decide on your own and you're going to add it and that's actually orchestration's main part because if you hear online also it's earlier it was prompt engineering people talk about context engineering this is precisely what context engineering is so we'll have four roles we'll have a memory we'll have perception we'll have decision and then we'll have action now this session is most structural it is designed to give you the structures of these four elements what these are this is the first section where I will not be sharing the code with Except for the MCP server and the LM gateway v3. We have the next update on the last one that we had.
The Admin: you are supposed to write the code this time and share with me and now you're going to see how claude and your anti-gravity because you've been asking right I can just write a prompt and make something let's see if it does this time or not because it will be painful I believe me and I'll be super happy because first time you'll feel that agents are not there or claude is not there it's not still a one world or one prompt journey I will be super happy you'll be super sad and when you're sad that will make me happy that's what this course But the thesis of the session is structural to understand the structure of the agent. How do we communicate from one agent to other agent? The loop is the architecture. later on some of the content I also mentioned that if you go on LinkedIn you will have superman or Spider-Man or Captain America telling you that you don't know how to make agents. There are four kind of agents. One is parl, one is All that's b*******, right?
00:20:00
The Admin: Because there is no single architecture that suits all the requirement and your agent is supposed to meet all the requirements or work for you in any case, it can work in parallel. It may need to work in sequential. It may need to work in sort of a synchronous mode as well. It may need to work maybe spawn parallely but all of them are still dependent on each other. So it becomes still sequential. So there are different architectures that these agent need to agree to right and it needs to evolve as the problem is being solved.
The Admin: So it's not one basket meets all eggs kind of requirement. session seven is going to expand the memory into three tier system. You'll understand what those three tiers are. But the idea is that now is the time for you to think about whenever I make any session solution. am my preferences? Am I carry forwarding the information that I've given? My birthday is that or my home is at this particular address. How do we store that?
The Admin: How do we make that persistent? So this is session six and from here onwards I'm hoping that you will carry forward that. Then we'll have the second kind of memory which is sort of structural but only required for when the loop is on. And third is even inside that we have a temporary memory which is required to just be there for once and then A good example is going to be a web server when you go online you fetch some information from the internet and then you want to just read summarize and forget about it because it may be a big huge page right so we need to get rid of that. So our session 7 is going to expand on that. Session 8 is going to take further and we are going to move to DAC which is going to be sort of a graph for us which is going to allow us to spawn any kind of agents that we want and later on we going to see that we actually move into a proper graph architecture. Rag also is going to be coming soon. Now the course the session essentially is designed to solve four specific prompts or four specific queries.
The Admin: I've given the queries this time so I don't have to think about I am not able to imagine a new application. A lot of people message me that I'm not able to come up with a problem statement of what do I build agent system that solves these four very simple prompts. You'll see the prompts are very simple but you will see that it is going to get the hell out of you because the way architectures need to be designed. where we stand session three we saw on PTB code interact and other things and some other basic Python we also introduce a very simple agentic loop. session four we introduced MCP so you can call any tools.
The Admin: there's a major upgrade on the MCP side that's why I'm sharing the MCP I'll take you take it to the MCP part also then we had session five and this is where we added our verdict part where every 11 call is now verified is there in session four also but now that job will go to perception which is going to verify and provide the next job also so agent 5 is a modern architecture using pantic so that is locked in I'm hoping you'll not forget that your cloud will not forget that so that is perfectly locked But the main part is how do we divide our agentic task into multiple agents and carry forward that now it's a very simple example and here the example tells you that there's a prompt hey assistant remind me to wish John on his birthday next week and also book a table for two near his office at 7 p.m.
The Admin: very simple prompt but the moment you think about it a single LM will not be able to handle it and we talking about again you're using Gemini preview which is obsolete now in my LM gateway I fixed that I hope you also fix that on your side does flashlight now it's a light model and if you give this kind of query you're going to see that it actually starts forgetting because it cannot carry forward all the tasks that are required a single call will not be able to handle it properly the query contains two independent goals one is to u remember that John has a birthday on next week I have to rewind it and the second task is to book that particular table and how many people near his office you see there are many small things inside it needs to know with John
The Admin: is talking about it needs to know what is the meaning of next week so somehow agent need to know what is a date today and what is the next week essentially and book a table for two near his office essentially means that I need to know John's office also and need to check schedule my calendar and then revert back right it's not a simple task there are many things that are happening there this is something that you will expect your EA to know properly now if you run this through agent five you're going to see three modes of failure the planner
00:25:00
The Admin: will solve the booking and it will forget the reminding The planner fuses both into a single calendar entry titled John's birthday dinner at 7 p.m. the planner takes three turn ping ponging between different goals. it moves the state from one to another and actually forgets what it was doing also. And try to do this vision five and you'll see that it's going to fail on one of these three parts. The session six decomposes this into three things. memory is there. I'm hoping memory you will always keep separately. Perception is going to read the query and it's going to decide okay there are bounded goals inside this particular query. It's going to divide the prompt or the query into multiple small goals which are unambiguous because each goal needs to be sort of atomic in nature which means that given all the information I have I should be able to fix that particular goal. That's how the perception prompt needs to be. Now it will take that particular prompt and throw it on decision saying that this is a goal that you need to fix. Now decision looks at the goal.
The Admin: It looks at the information provided to it. It will be also sent an artifact which may be a web output to basically work on it and just fixes things. It is not going to be reading something specific. It is always send information. Now memory is going to carry the fact which is going to be John's birthday or what date it is or what is his address and the stuff which goes to our decision and action is going to be essentially getting a instruction to call some MP tool and from there take the information and provide whether information or the tool functioned or not or is correct or not. So the same architecture type needs to handle four broad query types in the assignment at the end. and all four of them are going to cause a lot of pain to you. You'll see first is very easy. it always is.
The Admin: Second is going to be slightly difficult. Moment you fix second, first will be Moment you solve one and two and you try and try to solve three, you're going to see that either one or two is going to be now not working. once you solve three, you're going to see 1, two, and three, you're going to see four is not working. And when you solve four, you're going to see first is not working. Right? So you need to somehow come up with a system that solves one, two, three, and four properly. I have solved it on my end. I will share the code also. So it's not that problem not solvable. But the code for the first time will be shared when most of you have submitted the assignment. Right? It's not that I'll submit. And by the way, for this particular session six, a moment I share the code and if you submitted assignment after that, you will not receive any score because I've already shared the solution and I will always imagine that you copied it. You can come back to me and send me an email or a message that no, I did not look at a code. I promise God promoted me. So mommy promise that I solved it myself. I will not trust you. Okay? So make sure that you don't do that.
The Admin: solve this and run So there are four cognitive roles that are there for session six onwards and in future you may have 10 20 and today we're calling them roles. slowly we'll call them skills right but let's stick to roles today because it allows us to wrap our head around the architecture. So there are four roles here. each role has a fixed responsibility in invoke it is invoked in a specific order in the loop. All might be invoked or few might be invoked depending on where we are in the problem query solving and the framing of framing is as if it is responsible for something rather than just a pipeline right just not a part of the pipeline is actually responsible for something so if the task demands a particular responsibility that agent will need to be there so let's see what these are first is memory right now it is not an LLM based it is simple in future it can be rag based also in future it may
The Admin: actually be an LM that looks at the memory and then tells you something because it's not just rag there are facts about a particular person and need to summarize now pushing all of that into the main agent doing the work may not be the right idea right so it needs to essentially skip through some of these then we have perception is one of the most important guy for us perception is something that is going to look at the main query it will get some of the facts that are there which are related to the query it will decide that to solve this particular task I need divide this task into step C, step four. when I'm calling my decision on the step C, I need to provide it the output of step B or step A. Right? That all those decisions need to be taken So perception needs to be the strongest element that you need to have. Decision on the other hand which is going to be working once per iteration is going to be sort of given the objective that you need to do this. This is the information you have.
The Admin: These kind of roles can go to LMS which are not very strong. We do not have to go to Gemini for this. You can actually send it to GB2S or some other LLM which can easily solve those particular task or write a code for passing this particular All of the small tasks can be sent to these and this is what cloud is also doing. If you focus see clearly that when you're coding it sometimes call some other agents to go online and get the description and sends it right. So that's the overall job of decision and then we have Action is something you're already aware of. Action is going to be our MCP server which takes a particular role and solves it and gives back. This can be also agent in future.
00:30:00
The Admin: This can also be driven by LM in future depending on whether you have multiple actions to be taken and if one action fails and you have committed a 100% return rate then the LM looks at the failure and then decides this is failing because the PDF is non-partsible and PDF has some issue or it has OCR so why don't I solve it in another way right these are advanced systems where you want functioning 100% return rate and there are a few other component that support these four roles and these are very important and you would see them one on and off when we are working with claude. The first thing is called artifact in our case we have kept it very simple. Anything that is more than 4k 4 kilobyte is considered an artifact. in one of the aented task where you need to go to Wikipedia and scrape the Wikipedia and get the entry you're going to see that you get something like 250 kilobyte of pared text not even HTML is still bigger.
The Admin: So when you pass it and that is also by the way a part of MCP so I'll share that part. when we pass a particular web page it throws us the whole HTML thing from we have to extract the text out of it. I'm talking about text that text itself is 250 kilobyte and from there we're asking some detail to be extracted. If you take all of that through to Gemini is going to say, Gemini is not going to look at all that and remember what you were asking, So, that is artifact and you can decide how big or smaller artifact need to be. We have just kept a 4 kilobyte. It's a good number to handle separately. Now, artifacts are not even read by perception.
The Admin: perception is told that think of it like this let's say we ask compare the GDP of India with Estonia for some reason and tell me how they have progressed in the last 5 years u search Wikipedia for this that's a query so perception going to decide okay Wikipedia India Estonia GDP is going to ask decision to do something about decision is going to take the query is going and the query is going to be very simple to it. The decision will be told that I want you to go online find a Wikipedia page and run it right and extract the page. we know that LM are not going to do it. So it's going to do a web or scan MCB tool. URL will be scanned and the text is going to be taken out. where does this text sit? Right? That's the text we're talking about.
The Admin: That's a massive 250 kilobyte of text So that thing is going to be called an artifact. in the next loop, perception is going to be told it's there in the memory. By the way, we are going to move the artifact in the memory. memory also will not throw the artifact to perception when you told that in the last time you asked a decision to go on Wikipedia and extract the page it called a tool and that extracted page is stored in this artifact here is the artifact ID that's all now perception is going to look at I asked all of that but the data is stored in the ID number one now it will call decision that okay from here figure out India's the last five years here's the artifact ID and whenever artifact ID being passed the orchestration is going to take
The Admin: the raw dump of the artifact and then dump it to decision. So unless we are requesting artifact through some ID that artifact is never going to be part of any group loop. That is how the context bloats. This is very specific to era v3. It was not even part of v2. and this is something that is coming from going inside of the cloud code. If you see cloud code and how cloud code handle different things that is how these things are handled. They generate artifact and keep it separately. That is exactly what we're trying to do. In fact, if you see claude, sometimes it's going to also ask you, in fact, when you say that I do not want any emojis or m dashes in my content and blah blah. Let's say you put a preference, it's going to open something called memory. MD, update it there and then say okay, I updated my memory. We want those kind of features in our agent. So, that is exactly what it does. And for that, it also spawns agent because imagine that you're asking it to not send emoji and you have lot of requirements, right?
The Admin: your preferences are large. I want coffee that is hot only cappuccino only with brown sugar or maybe sugar milk will be let's say coconut milk for some reason and sugar coming from Africa and then water needs to be Argentinian. So let's say add all those preferences. So it reads the memory when you're saying okay I want you to only use VUV and not V and we are not other environments. It's going to read all of that. Okay, the guy likes coffee like this. he wants to have a vacation like this and all of that and then it's going to update, Not a great idea. So whenever we want these small task, you need to throw small agents which are going to be working on it. That's the artifact for us. And finally, the v3 gateway is an update of the v 2 that we had.
00:35:00
The Admin: The one important thing that has happened here is now all the free providers that are there they also provide smaller providers like small LLMs and we are not using them. So I thought why don't we use them and how can we use them now small are good in doing small things. So when you throw a prompt now and we're not talking perception always go to Gemini you'll understand why but let's say we're throwing a prompt to decision or we're throwing a point later on to memory especially when we want to save a memory we want the small LM to look at the query and decide which of the bigger LM should be called or which LM should be called should it be a small medium LM or a large LM because based on the query for example if you ask that update is born one Paris if that's the only thing that is required we don't need to
The Admin: All Gemini and BAR tokens. Small LMS are really really low cost in production also. So it will not cost at all and these are called router LLMs. We do not bombard the router LLMs also with full context. We just tell that here's not a full prompt. In fact we will tell that the data right now which needs to be processed is something like 400,000 words. here are the first and initial few words. Which element should it go to? Right. So we keep it out of the full context also. So it just decides looking at how complex the task is to and then decide which it needs to go to. So that's the router part that is also added. Now router works really well for decision and memory. But for perception we need stronger LMS. we had three four strong LM choices then where perception router can also take part. Okay. let's look at the query.
Pandurang Patil: I'm trying to this artifact and So memory is always going to be stored as some sort of a file. if there's empty file when you're referring to cloud code agent which is generating some files and…
The Admin: That's correct.
The Admin: An artifact is a temporary thing deleted after each run.
Pandurang Patil: how do we perceive the memory…
Pandurang Patil: how do we look at it is when we talk about memory so okay okay
The Admin: I've not the memory yet.
The Admin: We'll see how the memory is structured. Okay.
Ankit Biswas: Hi. So my question is on kind of similar lines about memory and artifact. I understand memory is the conversational memory and artifact is something you're reading real time and you're going to delete after the session is over and while reading it you're saying it's going to have a lot of data which can make it the LM hallucinate more.
Ankit Biswas: I just didn't understand how to process that. you said that the artifact ID and all that that you mentioned. I did not quite catch that the whole connection between memory having the artifact ID…
The Admin: Catch what?
Ankit Biswas: then giving to LLM and it will just quickly are we having a sort of lookup table that's what we are saying yeah yeah when you so…
The Admin: So, memory I have not described yet. So, if you wait till that part, we go into the architecture of the memory. Memory has two parts.
The Admin: One is persistent, the other is Non-persistent we have not discussed that we just saying that we have these two component that will help us.
Ankit Biswas: if you can explain that during that time it's fine I'm not able to make that connection of memory and artic effect and how to best use both of them. Okay.
The Admin: One is the V g artifact.
Ankit Biswas: Okay. Sure.
The Admin: Okay. Artifact is not same as context.
Ankit Biswas: Thank you.
Avinash Anad: Hello.
Avinash Anad: So this artifact is same as context or smaller subset we can still Okay.
The Admin: Artifact is a sudden burst of information that I need to process and then throw away.
The Admin: Yeah for example if I ask you can you go online and tell me what is the latest that and let's do that let's say I want to know what is the latest West Bengal or in fact Iran US war what is the latest in this moment I do this all of this will happen all of this is artifact not really useful maybe I'll just go inside and…
Avinash Anad: Okay.
The Admin: look at this
The Admin: Here also only this information is useful but all the other stuff that you're seeing is artifact I don't want that right and even after all this for example 28 updates do I need to tell the user there were 28 updates or…
The Admin: there's auto update button or all of this part of artifact all the crap that comes in from which information needs to be gathered and stored that's a different thing that may go to memory that may go inside the context but here temporary context dump to an LM which is going to be destroyed very Yes.
Avinash Anad: the window…
Avinash Anad: which the LLM will be focusing on but deciding not required or not. Okay,…
The Admin: Yes. The artifact Memory will not have noise.
00:40:00
Avinash Anad: nice. Understood. Thank you.
The Admin: Anyone else?
The Admin: Any question on this artifact? Pan again.
Pandurang Patil: this perception is equivalent to planning mode similar to that. so I was reading this perception wherein that it goes into iterative loop and…
Pandurang Patil: 
The Admin: How do you do planning mode?
Pandurang Patil: it has a checklist of tasks that is going to verify if the tasks are Okay.
The Admin: we have not discussed that that is something we did in V2 it is yet to come I'll not confuse the people I also earlier mentioned that this will become planning in time to come…
The Admin: but let's not mix the two right now okay sitan What task…
Saichetan Thalla: So I have a question on so you told initial there's a query book a table next to my office right and this does not work with the monolithic code what we had before but every time context for every loop we give context so it should remember what task it should do …
The Admin: what should do? Perception knows what task need to be done.
The Admin: Who does it? Decision. Yeah,…
Saichetan Thalla: I mean so I thought it cannot remember which office it has multiple tasks to do and you told that when it do first task it would remember so when it do third task it would forget the first task but you give context every time.
The Admin: it will. Sorry. Yeah,…
Saichetan Thalla: I mean on every loop you append the message and you give to the agent right what is the previous message and stuff. So it knows what it has done before, right? So how would it forget
The Admin: because in the long context whether it has done something or not is also lost.
The Admin: You're assuming that as a cont and that's why I'm saying just take the prompt and give it to your agent five and you need to see it because when I tell you that agents will fail you need to see it failing me just telling you that are not good still capture that you'll think no I'm working with clot it can do everything yeah so if you connect clot with our system also it will work but right now you're stuck with Gemini 3 and it's a good thing because you're working with weaker LMS to make sure your architecture is strong moment you add a better then they can handle 000 token context So again we have perception.
Saichetan Thalla: Okay.
The Admin: The actual query goes to Perception decides okay these are the three goals that I need to do. G2 and G3. For each one of them it creates a bounded t for a Bounded task would mean artifacts, memories and all the other details are passed on by the perception separately. Right?
The Admin: And if something needs to go from decision to our G2 that is also decided So perception essentially handles all the information that needs to be sent to a particular agent. This is how you'll work as a CEO also right let's say a task comes in that okay your balance sheet has an error. What will you do? You not leave everything and start working balance sheet. You'll take the feedback send it to your CFO and ask him to fix this part. I need it to be done. That is exactly what perception is doing. Manish information.
Manish Kapoor: Yeah, so when we say artifact, it has information or context plus noise.
The Admin: It has information not knowledge. Yes.
Manish Kapoor: So the agent will be there to actually filter the context or the information and store it into the memory which will be used by perception. Is my understanding current correct?
The Admin: One of the use case you mentioned is covered there.
The Admin: Agent will read the artifact decide whether it has information from it and use that for the current task and forget everything. The task is or…
Manish Kapoor: All right.
The Admin: if it is required to be stored in the memory it can be stored in the memory or it has to be returned back and given to the next step. It can do that also. There are three things that are possible. First scenario would be that take the India GDP for the last five years and give me the sum. In that case it doesn't need to store everything and will look at the five details summit up and give the final number.
The Admin: So whatever was then artifact has been modified and artifact is not there. Second give me the last five GB numbers in that case it is passing information right. It depends on the use case.
Manish Kapoor: But if you're adding noise and…
Manish Kapoor: keeping it, won't it add cost of memory to the solution?
The Admin: That's what I said that's why artifact is not kept right that's why I just said okay as I said ideally yes a part of it we don't know a part of it really depends on …
Manish Kapoor: Okay. Got it. Thank you. Yeah.
praveen v: So artifact life is until the query is processed.
The Admin: how the things are the perception and…
praveen v: The control is done by The artifacts management.
00:45:00
The Admin: automatic if the detail is being sent are more than 4 kilobyte automatically becomes artifact. whether we need to store it or not that's a call perception.
praveen v: 
praveen v: So the artifact size is fixed. It is 4 KB or it can be also configured.
The Admin: Cts minimum size is 4 KB. If something can become artifact that should more than 4 KB. So we don't know It can be 400 terabyte also.
praveen v: So that control we don't have I mean maximum only this much cap is allowed for a artifact. So that kind of control we can set somewhere in the agentic.
The Admin: saying the reverse I'm saying the minimum size for artifact is 4 kilobyte maximum can be anything and…
Shanmuga Suntharam: You're welcome.
The Admin: 4 kiloby is in your control because you're orchestrating it you can say that my artifact needs to be 100 kilobyte okay pushra
praveen v: Thank you.
The Admin: Correct.
Pushpendra Sharma: So I'm trying to relate this artifact with the feature that claude has with the same name as artifact. So yesterday I was trying to build this fitness tracker and it generated one JSX file which I can publish and share that link with someone else. They can also add their data but that is not a very temporary thing that is something that I can use on daily basis and that is not also something that can be replaceable or can be done. So these two things are related to each other or…
The Admin: I'll call this a noisy artifact.
Pushpendra Sharma: that is something different.
The Admin: I'll call Claude's artifact as a good artifact.
Pushpendra Sharma: So that is something that we can use for longer duration not just for a simple
The Admin: In fact, a better way of looking at both artifact is temporary artifact and a permanent artifact, But for me, it's more memory. It's going inside the memory and we're calling it a memory artifact. But this is a temporary artifact for this session. the problem in that terminology is that a manager is your orchestration loop, right?
Jatin Pahuja: perception is giving us the four goals or five goals how many task we have divided into. So can we make it analogous to perception as a agent manager and different goals as a different agents which is providing services to the agent manager. Okay.
The Admin: that manager really manages the perception also. So if you're okay to say it's a sub manager after the orchestration loop I'm okay to agree to you right…
Jatin Pahuja: Correct.
The Admin: because in any case we have one manager and a team so here we have them one manager is orchestrator loop inside that we have perception so it's a sub manager or assistant manager through the orchestration loop okay Ashini
Jatin Pahuja: Everything going to the LLM would be through the manager only. Okay. Okay. What?
Ashwani Bindroo: So Rohan I just want to confirm my understanding about artifact. So basically if I have put it in the layman terms in AI world artifact could be things that might be produced by a process for example like docker images or test results or reports. If I have to give it a real world analogy, think of baking a cake.
Ashwani Bindroo: Artifact could be a recipe or a final cake or a batter. is my understanding correct? Okay, thank you.
The Admin: Yeah. Kangala repeat…
Kanagala Kartheek: Yeah. Hi. one note artifact is it's fed into LL and the output is the memory.
The Admin: what I said.
Kanagala Kartheek: Artifact is fed into the LLM and the output is the memory right.
The Admin: Output can be memory is always not the memory.
Kanagala Kartheek: 
Kanagala Kartheek: Okay. how to diff any example to differentiate okay so 4 + 4 is the artifact factor okay all
The Admin: What is 4 + 4? 8. 8 is going to the user. It's not going to the memory.
The Admin: 4 plus was not the artifact because not more than 400 4K.
The Admin: So total number of markdown words that can go inside you can change it.
Swapnil Gusani: Is the 4K minimum limit does it have any uristics behind it?
Swapnil Gusani: For example, but as in the context length of the model, If you're running an SLM on your machine, have you seen that most of the time the settings which we keep is either 4,000 or 8,000 tokens or something. does this have something to do with that? keeping it 4K. Okay.
The Admin: because we have a router. Moment it sees an artifact, it is already going to send it to a bigger LM which has a much bigger context. It will not be sent to LM SLM.
Swapnil Gusani: But if your models have larger context…
00:50:00
Swapnil Gusani: then you can have a larger artifact limit right.
The Admin: Do you realize we are limiting the minimum size the artifact not the maximum size?
The Admin: Maximum size.
Swapnil Gusani: So I'm saying that you can raise that minimum limit higher…
Shanmuga Suntharam: Focus.
Swapnil Gusani: if all the models have I'm just trying to understand…
The Admin: What will it change?
Swapnil Gusani: where 4K comes from.
The Admin: No, but what will it change for you? let's say there's no limit.
The Admin: Then everything is artifact. Then what changes?
Swapnil Gusani: Then everything will fall below that limit.
Swapnil Gusani: You will not create any it will just noise will be there.
The Admin: What happens? Let's say we do not have a limit for artifact. And this question goes to everyone. Let's say we don't have a limit for artifact. What happens? Everything is artifact.
pratyush kumar: Nothing wrong.
Vikas Gupta: Nothing will choose.
pratyush kumar: Exactly the way it is.
Pankaj Yadav: No noise will be there I guess.
The Admin: No. No. Then nobody no…
Manish Kapoor: Our swelling Taste.
The Admin: then none of you have understood.
The Admin: If everything is an artifact, then perception will never be able to see things that are below the artifact limit.
sandeep hegde: So it tries to send everything in maybe small LLM or…
sandip autane: So as artifacts are actually stored in the form of files maybe more IO's will happen.
sandeep hegde: something then we keep on getting errors.
The Admin: I think nobody you're not asking question.
Swapnil Gusani: Yeah, you should explain this part and…
Ankit Biswas: Thank
Swapnil Gusani: 
Swapnil Gusani: you'll In the shop.
The Admin: No. No. Okay. So, here's a piece of information. Right now, we have 4K limit.
The Admin: If it is more than 4K, it becomes an fact. If it is not an artifact, it remains as a text. Are we clear?
Swapnil Gusani: right? Because it goes directly in the context of any model…
The Admin: Of what?
Swapnil Gusani: which is dealing with that, right? Okay.
Soham Harshe: Perception.
The Admin: Forget model. I'm not talking perception decision.
sandip autane: It will get added to the prompt directly perception.
The Admin: It will get added to the prompt directly of perception clearance.
Swapnil Gusani: Okay.
The Admin: If it is an artifact then the artifact number will be added. We clear?
Swapnil Gusani: Okay,…
The Admin: Decision will either send the text or…
sandip autane: So context length
Satya Nayak: Exploding.
The Admin: it will either send the artifact. That really doesn't matter because it is going to get exactly the same content that's there. So we are handling the perception context here. We're not handling the decision context here. Now perception always goes to Gemini which has a context limit of 64K. So we are not worried about that.
The Admin: We just do not want to pollute it with lot of stuff. what is the question?
Swapnil Gusani: if this is purely for keeping perception clean, decision is anyway going to deal with all of that.
The Admin: Yes. Exactly.
Swapnil Gusani: Okay.
The Admin: Okay. Rajes
Rajesh Joshi: So, just trying to put it in context of the agentic chats that we have claude chat or chat GPD. So for example in one chat window we ask them a certain prompt for certain analysis and I give it some documents etc upload all of those and then it generates certain set of output and cert and the chat keeps moving along.
Rajesh Joshi: Are we saying that the past conversations all of that has happened including those uploaded documents etc.
Rajesh Joshi: Those are also kind of like the artifacts.
The Admin: your question and…
The Admin: description is in Modern claw and all they launch sub agents to extract information from documents and those documents are artifacts. It just gets the summary of that. So the summary becomes a part of the memory.
The Admin: If we're talking even one year back or 6 months back, this was not the case. It is going to read the old PDF and keep in the memory. There was no artifact. So anytime we have a sub agent being launched artifact is created there. Correct.
Rajesh Joshi: And…
Rajesh Joshi: the subarant that is being launched depends upon obviously the prompt and what kind of task that needs to be done. Got it.
The Admin: J right no right would this be covered later depends on you do you want it to be part of your architecture moving forward all maintaining your own architectures today we have taken a call of just
Jatin Pahuja: the time…
Jatin Pahuja: where when we will be converting text to the artifact 4K we have decided. So will we be doing it on base of a goal or will we be mixing the goals and making an artifact or what would be the significance how we would be doing would this be covered later okay that is the design Sure.
The Admin: making sure anything more than 4K is an artifact and the reason is we are in session six. Some of you are asking questions which are session 10 really good but my job right now is to make sure that you understand what artifacts are okay memory action.
Jatin Pahuja: Okay. Thank you.
varun: So two questions which is PDMA perception decision M and A okay second question and you said that anything beyond 4K we are keeping as artifact has an ID…
00:55:00
The Admin: Will be sent to the perception to send it to the decision.
varun: which will provide to the prompt in order to send to the LM right that's what we are trying to do with this perception is in directly LM call only right we're just calling as perception because the prompt says that it's your decision to make a orchestration between these Something like that.
The Admin: Correct. Okay.
varun: Okay. Thank you.
The Admin: Orchestration.
Swapnil Gusani: Which of these four roles deal with the conversation history? Is it the perception or which of these?
The Admin: No only the perception has some part of it.
Swapnil Gusani: So none of them are going to look at the conversation history perception and do the other roles like decision they maintain their own conversation history with perception or they just come back with the results.
The Admin: No. No.
The Admin: Unless Okay.
The Admin: Yes. Unless perception provides you some information in today's session.
Swapnil Gusani: And then they can save it in memory…
Swapnil Gusani: but they can't interactively chat with each other.
The Admin: Yes. I want to repeat.
Rahul Kumar: Hi Rohan. I'm having the out of context question. one of the assignment I was doing And one of the assignment for the prefab I was doing.
The Admin: Yeah,…
Rahul Kumar: And what it is happening it's keep on going in the loop and loop and somewhere I'm not able to understand the whole things. Okay. T
The Admin: please ask it at the end of the ssion. Completely out of context. Okay.
Ammar Adil: Rohan we have not yet discussed about…
Ammar Adil: how are we going to attach these artifact to the LLM call right are going to sorry okay so when you say that your LLM is going to give a artifact ID and…
The Admin: No, the session ended now.
Ammar Adil: you have and it will be shared to the parent agent so the parent agent just has the ID. So, how is it going to attach that to the next call? Is it going to take the raw byes and it is going to send it as a text file …
The Admin: again look at the question it's going to take the raw byes and…
Ammar Adil: something. Okay.
The Admin: moment it say takes the raw bite that means it has read the artifact right so it will just have the artifact ID it will say decision that it will tell the orchestrator that hey call a decision with this artifact ID it's like you calling your driver and…
The Admin: you're calling your accountant give the driver the document
The Admin: So the driver can go and deliver. So that is exactly…
Ammar Adil: …
Ammar Adil: Talking about that analogy when once Okay.
The Admin: what the next session is all about. The session remaining there's a lot of page content after this.
Ammar Adil: Fine. I think I'm asking question to ahead of time.
The Admin: Okay.
Ammar Adil: Thank you.
The Admin: Here's a control flow. before you read the content flow, please read this also. So the image below is a general flow but still not fully multi- aent description but it's a really good flow to understand how a flow for agentic system should happen right now if you see I'm zooming so bund can see it properly okay if you see the user query does not go to any lm as a first step okay the user query
The Admin: goes inside this box where we ask the memory. there you can have a rag or you can have some other LLM also but that's not our main agentic LM. It asks a question that whether we have asked this question earlier or not. that's where the preferences come in right and we see whether we have asked that and this is exactly one of the query for assignment also. So we're first going to see whether this kind of question has been answered or not. For example, my birthday is on 25th of July. then after some days I asked that hey do you think is it a Sunday or Saturday this birthday so it needs to go to the memory and figure out right and this is a new chat that we are starting new session but memory is there so first please check whether this kind of question has been asked or not can you tell me if this arrow this line is cut for
Swapnil Gusani: I guess It's
Ashwani Bindroo: No.
Jatin Pahuja: 
Yadunandan L H: No.
Samindra MIshra: No, he sucked the m
The Admin: Okay, that mean I can't see.
Ammar Adil: No.
The Admin: Okay, perfect. So if you're seeing yes, the loop goes somewhere below, right? So we're going to see where it is actually going. But then some additional information is required. Now in that case, if the question hasn't been answered, the agent can reason and evaluate if the question requires any additional information to answer or it needs something from the user itself. For example, if I ask you that hey what do you think would be a good place to go for honeymoon? The agent should come and ask hey are you married right? So those are those question required. if agent decides it need additional information you can analyze the If the user query is complex it can decompose into different parts. that is what we're trying to do and that's where the agent decomposition happens. So additional information is required yes go back ask the user or search the internet. if basically then decompose it.
01:00:00
The Admin: If no then we proceed somewhere somewhere else. the decomposition happens again and that is what our perception is doing right now. for each subquery this is where the decision comes in. Every subquery for us is a decision. Now in the current loop we can only do the sequentially but by the time we're in session 9 or 10 we can do all the decisions parallelly. That's the power you're going to see when moment we have let's say a graph kind of network. the good part about that is that let's say you say that find all the details about India and Pakistan war since last 40 years. In that case it can actually spawn 100 decisions and all of them can actually launch different 100 search queries and then we can go online and collect all the data in parallel.
The Admin: That's how modern LMS work right. So we need that parallel system but right now we are locked sequentially. war Pakistan last year. Search India war Pakistan 10 years ago. Every time it has to finish a task one task two and task three then it actually proceeds. We have not built it as synchronous thing yet. So for each subquery query and routing and processing happens. The query routing is where our perception is involved right now. And then we have our tools also which are allocated to do decision. We're not providing any tools of perception.
The Admin: doesn't need any it's just going to ask the decision to hey this is a tool go out and check out right that's the thing we are doing another great benefit of this right now artifact as I mentioned is a temporary thing that we attaching in future a skill can also be temporary thing that we can attach to the decision so a decision certainly can become a web expert or it can become a rag expert or it can become a PDF file creator expert or it can become let's say doctor right all the other skills or something that is really working well with prefab so our MCP tools can also become
The Admin: some sort of skills and we can launch these decision or these agents with specific skills where at the runtime we can decide what skill do we need and suddenly we do not have to populate all the LM tools that we have on one decision decision is thinking which tool should I use or I don't have a tool right we don't want that to happen that is precisely the benefit of this decision and artifact and it will evolve in future and after that information when is retrieved we into the loop again and again and we can figure out and answer the user. But this part the query routing and processing is important and I want you to understand that when the artifact is required. Here is where our decision is required.
The Admin: decisions can now has only one NCP server but we can at the runtime let the perception decide that okay launch this particular agent or launch this particular decision guy with this particular skill code writing skill web search skill maybe Excel skill or maybe Google meet skill or Gmail skill or excel skill or writing+ CUDA kernel skills all those skills can be separate buckets and our agents can be launched with those specific skills right but I said this is still not a multi- aent description doesn't describe that fully because it just says that okay we have a single line what we are going to be doing is that we may be able to spawn for each may not be a sequential thing for each may be a parallel thing for us and that will happen automatically. Now this is the agent six loop that is there and here there are four rows which are mixed which are fixed in iteration or order and that is something that is also covered in the image above.
The Admin: Moment our agent 6 loop start this is what we call agent. Everything else is an LLM with functions or with a memory. Moment our loop starts we read the query and a history. We see whether we have something similar being discussed earlier or not. then memory will provide to us. Memory is literally a class from which is storing information. if we get the hits which is going to be the targets that meet the requirement or very similar to the query then we take the handle and descriptives and pass it back to agentic loop no lm's called yet now that is going to send observe to perception now observe will have the query it will have the hits which is the memory it will have the history which may be the chat it is not the part of the memory chat thing is not part right what is happening what happened in the last iteration is not part of the memory memory here we are specifically talking about
The Admin: the stored facts and the stored things that are required.
Ashwani Bindroo: I'm really sorry.
The Admin: It can be agent it can be human preferences, it can be facts, it can be some other things, right? These are fixed things or fixed files that are there when you start the model or when you start your computer. Somebody is Ashini still not on mute. Thank you. So that's observe packet is going to go to perception is going to look at that and it's going to see this is the main part that you need to look at. Perception is going to create observations right observations will have goals and it will have any attachment that are required or not. Attachment here might be a part of the memory. if a part of the memory is there then it automatically comes the prompt. But if it is an artifact it's just going to say that hey can you send the artifact number four? Can you send the artifact?
01:05:00
The Admin: Can you send that DWG file? suddenly you can start thinking okay your invoice said that five products need to be made. One of the product the engineing company's coming back to you and telling you that hey the fourth product cannot manufactured. Then you're sending your email to your engineer saying hey the fourth file food product cannot be manufactured and you're asking agent that get me the drawing files of so all those you're not even seeing just copy paste and dump it and ask your engineers to look at you're not a cat expert you're not a simulation expert that's the artifact thing that perception doesn just need to know what they exist and pass it on to someone through work now that is why we have a get bytes here a bite goes in and out that's artifact if required
The Admin: Then it goes to decision. That is where our next steps is. So in the next step we'll have the goal. We'll have the hits if required to be sent. Then we have the attached artifacts. We'll have the history and other tools. The attachments and history are decided by Perception decides whether this goes or not. So your decision is literally like an empty LM that has no idea what is happening. It is just told that this file is a bug solve it or send an email with this particular content to that guy or read this particular PDF and get me all the information or go online or we went online we found this 10 artifacts or 10 HTML pages summarize them right so these are definfined atomic jobs perception is not going to be doing any of that because otherwise the whole context will be lost this was a big issue that we had in V2 and we really finally solved it using very complex structures but right now we're making it part of the session six itself. So we know that we have to follow the artifacts in future.
The Admin: When the decision answers that answer is again going to it may involve action which is using some MCP tool because it may need to create an artifact right who's creating artifacts here always remember decision is creating artifacts using our action our design itself might be writing a big file generally that won't happen but let's say write a big code that code may become artifact right imagine that your writes a big code some 4,000 lines of code that code goes to action it fails Now that information goes to perception. How are you going to send the 4 400,000 or 4,000 lines of code to perception and ask it to look at the code? It will know what bug is, but we still have to call decision to fix a bug. Not a right strategy. You're going to send the artifact again the file name ID number. We're going to send the error that came from the action. Now it will launch a new decision saying that hey This is the bug we Fix So perception you need to understand that it is not going to look inside the files. It has the file.
The Admin: It can pass on the file but does not look inside the file If it is less than 4K is manageable. The context will not explore. It can see and can guide properly that hey in the small letter that you are sending you made a mistake in the name of the person is Mr. Sharma not Mr. Warner fix it then it can do that part. and all that depends on really that 4K bucket. You can decide to keep it You can decide to keep it large. We saw that 4K was really good for Gemini to handle and that's where the limit is coming from. If you're going to use cloud maybe 40 KB 40 kilobyte will also be good enough. But that's the overall agent call that you have to write. This is your assignment by the way which you have to Make sure that four attach all the four prompts that I'm going to be sharing with you, you can actually fix that. Okay. let me make it smaller.
The Admin: So big enough okay all that I've mentioned already after that we will move to pyantic so any questions on this graph another You have to ask a question after raising hand above.
Anubhav Panda: Yes, sorry I was on mute. So, I wanted to understand the difference between conversation history and memory. So, is the memory kind of from our past conversation that we had with the agent stores all the and…
The Admin: It's correct. Memory is persistent. There's something that is saved on the file.
Anubhav Panda: one more thing like can the agent be taught to learn from this memory for example if it has called a tool earlier and it has stayed with some parameters. So those things can be stored in the memory and…
01:10:00
Anubhav Panda: when second iteration it can learn from its mistake while calling that to
The Admin: That is correct.
The Admin: But has to be specifically written by you somewhere in your agentic loop. When you say can my agent do this, it can if you give that feature. you need to develop that feature. Okay. Stop there.
Swapnil Gusani: The first step…
Swapnil Gusani: which we saw was that was checking the memory whether this query has been answered before,…
The Admin: Yeah, correct.
Swapnil Gusani: right? But the answer to the query can change with time. how does the agent decide when to look at the memory and when to not And…
The Admin: Here agent is not deciding to look at the Memory is looked at and when we provide the information back to the agent, it goes with a time stamp of the memory.
Swapnil Gusani: and who decides that this information is stale now? Is it The perception or is there nothing other? Okay.
The Admin: perception. Who else is there?
The Admin: Shi one second.
Shrinidhi Deshapande: Yeah. So in the sequence
The Admin: For example, in the last case, what is the price of silver in the memory, goes search online. Price of silver today is 2 lakh rup kilogram. It's saved.
The Admin: After a week I ask what is the price of silver today goes two lakh comes in but with a time stamp.
The Admin: So now if you're telling the agent that today is this and this is a time stamp it's going to say it's one week old let me figure out now answer might be better the last week was this it has increased one lakh so that all dramatics may happen but time stap needs to go with the memory that will automatically happen it is not in the control of perception to look at the memory that's…
Swapnil Gusani: But it will still check the memory,…
Swapnil Gusani: Okay. okay.
The Admin: why I'm asking you to look at the loop here what is the first thing that is called memory perception does not decide that's why I'm saying who is your agent specifically you are getting confused
The Admin: in thinking your perception is the agent here. In fact, a lot of people get confused is not The agent is the orchestration loop. So when you guys think can I learn let's say lang chain and use cloud, the cloud is not The lang chain is So here the architecture that you're writing is the agent. So your agent need to decide memory should be read or not red, should be forwarded. All of these lines that you're seeing is your agent. Inside you may have an LM working. So our agent here the first thing. Memory is a key. It will go to the memory look something similar and then come back. Now you can think that I need to add here itself. What is the price of silver today? It looks at the memory price of silver was last week. It returns no idea. That is completely up to you. But that is again the was a part of the loop that needs to be decided by you.
Swapnil Gusani: So in this architecture do we call the memory regardless using the program and…
Swapnil Gusani: then we provide the information.
The Admin: In this graph also and…
The Admin: in this graph also the first thing that happens is we call the memory irrespective of whatever is there.
Swapnil Gusani: Okay.
The Admin: And there's one more play…
Shrinidhi Deshapande: So in this sequence you said that at memory we are not calling LM. So where exactly are you calling it? Is it that the perception what is wrong? Okay. even. Okay.
The Admin: but I'll talk about it later. Basically this part if you see the last part we'll call output tool call result artifact ID. So there are some parts where we can call an LM to look at what happened and decide whether I should store it inside the memory or not like who's storing in the memory right my birthday is 20th of July who's stoing so has to store right so that part is also on but I'll show that in the architecture and not confuse
Rahul Kumar: Yeah, I will say my understanding. So whenever we do anything the query and all it comes okay those are being given to the first check into the memory and then along with all the artifacts and it's going to perception and…
The Admin: No. Who created artifact?
Rahul Kumar: no artifacts will happen during the processing during the searching and…
The Admin: Who can create artifact? of who will create…
Satya Nayak: That's it.
Rahul Kumar: searching. Okay.
The Admin: who will create artifact decision.
Ankit Biswas: decision.
The Admin: So unless decision is called in the loop perception cannot receive the artifact ID.
The Admin: You never send the artifact only the perception artifact ID never…
Rahul Kumar: So artifact is not being sent to the perception.
The Admin: unless it is less than 4 KB which is small text perception is handing over to decision.
Rahul Kumar: 
Rahul Kumar: And then perception is handing over to the And decision will take the LLM call or which tool it will come and all. Those will be decided then accordingly it will be given to the axle MCP.
01:15:00
The Admin: If it is call correct.
Rahul Kumar: So this memory …
The Admin: All right.
Rahul Kumar: then anything let's say the agent comes. So the very first thing it will be always to check into the memory whether it's been served earlier or not.
The Admin: There are multiple reasons for that. First of all, it's cheap. There's no LM call involved actually just to check. Even if it's a rag, it's very cheap. So, we do it anyways.
The Admin: And sometimes our preferences are also in memory, I like Python. I don't like m dashes or emoji. All of that needs to be read before we initiate an LLM also. So all of that needs to be fetched. Okay.
Ankit Biswas: Yeah, There's probably a similar question. So, you're saying you're yet to tell us…
Ankit Biswas: where we are exactly going to write the memory or what places the memory is going to get returned or…
The Admin: It's is the last step after each loop is about to end LM is called and…
Ankit Biswas: the last step. Okay. But for that our prompt has to be really sophisticated so that only the most optimized things are getting stored in the memory and…
The Admin: look at what happened and think whether we need to update the memory or not are good at that part. Yes.
Ankit Biswas: Okay.
The Admin: But yeah.
Ankit Biswas: And what about the conversation history? Are we storing that separately during the runtime?
The Admin: Yes, that is the loop.
Ankit Biswas: So that is the And sorry again this whole artifact ID So this artifact will be generated I mean when the tool calls happen through action it gets to see artifact the whole noise data and then it throws it back to decision and…
The Admin: One sec.
Ankit Biswas: when the tool call happens that time the artifacts gets in the play right…
The Admin: One sec. who sees the artifact here? He said he sees the artifact. Correct.
Ankit Biswas: 
Ankit Biswas: then it goes back to the decision Okay.
The Admin: No. What happens after the action?
Ankit Biswas: Yeah. Can you just explain this part? I think I still have a Yeah.
The Admin: Perception creates a Goal goes to decision.
The Admin: This decides to call MCP tools output is there. what happens next all the information is sent to perception.
The Admin: Artifact ID. Perception sees. Yes. Tool worked. Website didn't fail. Nothing happened. Now it will call decision. Okay. So last time another decision guy called or looked at the website. Here's the detail of the website. I want to extract this. It's a two-step process always every artifact.
Ankit Biswas: So you're saying decision uses the tool has the artifact it sends it back to the perception.
Ankit Biswas: So for every artifact it's a two-step process So one decision will call the tool that will see the artifact…
The Admin: Artifact you don't use the word C…
Ankit Biswas: then the perception.
The Admin: because it may confuse some I'm getting confused.
Ankit Biswas: Okay. Yeah.
The Admin: do not want to use the word C.
Ankit Biswas: Okay. What…
The Admin: I repeat generated by the action…
Ankit Biswas: what would be the correct word then?
The Admin: because moment you're saying somebody some No LLM has seen it.
Ankit Biswas: 
Ankit Biswas: Okay. So in the first run the perception goes to decision the decision calls the tool the tool generates that artifact sends it back to perception perception create sends the artifact ID.
The Admin: Send what? Back to perception. correct.
Ankit Biswas: So then again for the same thing the perception tells the decision okay the tool call has worked this is the artifact ID and…
The Admin: Eat it.
Ankit Biswas: yeah so my point is when this artifact ID is sent back to the perception…
The Admin: Perception is not looking at the artifact.
Ankit Biswas: how do we know that this artifact ID contains the focused answer and not the entire noise yeah that's another Yes.
The Admin: It's looking at the artifact ID. So, there's no way for perception to Agree. Who's okay?
Ankit Biswas: So, who's clearing that noise?
The Admin: The reason we are not doing is because artifact may have noise. Correct? That is…
Ankit Biswas: Okay.
The Admin: why we are spawning another LLM called decision who's now going to look at the artifact and clean that noise up.
Ankit Biswas: So, that's why the Okay.
The Admin: Yeah, that's why the second call for the decision.
Ankit Biswas: Yeah.
The Admin: And also remembers your and this is conceptually very important to understand perception is not asking the decision to read the artifact.
The Admin: Perception is telling the orchestration loop that the decision needs to read the artifact and the artifact is dumped onto the decision. Otherwise, we are asking one more thing read Reading also requires one more call. You need to understand that these are dumb things. When I ask you to go open a particular page, it means picking the book, turning the page and then reading. There are four steps involved. But humans for everything is just open the page. Right? In case of we need to understand everything is a step. So when our perception wants a decision to read an artifact,…
01:20:00
The Admin: it just mentioned The loop needs to see whether artifact ID was mentioned. If it was mentioned, it's going to dump that to decision automatically. You'll understand that once we look at the prompt.
Ankit Biswas: And Okay.
Ankit Biswas: And this artifact ID Yeah, I got it. I think so.
The Admin: Okay, correct.
Ankit Biswas: This artifact ID when it goes into the process, I mean Okay. Yeah.
The Admin: I think we no rag is very very different thing right now.
Atul Dumrewal: So I understand the flow after perception.
Atul Dumrewal: Based on this discussion which Ankit had this might be a basic question like the memory is only a rag call which we are making to and…
The Admin: you're not going even there. It's similar if you're thinking if you are just doing a keyword search not in session six hits that's…
Atul Dumrewal: basically the agent orchestrator would have an LM which would interpret the memory blob which is then how is the memory passed if So would it be some reg x or…
The Admin: why we're calling it hits where is my birthday I check lines birthday mentioned pass it on it can be birthday of my dog also something like x In session six we need to update it rag session 10.
Atul Dumrewal: something? Got it.
The Admin: So we are session 10 11 12 that is why we have 14 more sessions always there's a standard correct that is when we heard that plot code was leaked…
praveen v: So as of now the agent is nothing but the orchestration of all these five components. This is and there can be some changes in the near future as per the research.
The Admin: what was leaked not the model right model nobody cared plot code got leaked was the bigger And that is exactly How the plot code is managing this flow internally.
praveen v: And along with them is there any other system prompt that would control this station? No. No.
The Admin: Correct. Yes.
praveen v: Okay. Thank you.
The Admin: Not the promp system for the clock code. Both are different. Manish.
praveen v: Paint it.
Manish Kapoor: So yeah Rohan this memory is a radius cache kind of a thing or…
Manish Kapoor: a vector store in terms of rack solution.
The Admin: Today JSON tomorrow maybe okay I couldn't a question.
Manish Kapoor: after. Okay,
Akshat Jaipuria: loop and this loop previously used to just have a singular LLM calls and perception and decision. So loop does not have any otherwise call. So I'm just comparing the way we were writing presently. So we have a llm call and based on that the loop works right whatever they give back.
The Admin: No, no, that is not what we did earlier. Also, even in the last case,…
The Admin: you had a agent. We never sent anything directly to the LLM. You always had the loop getting
Akshat Jaipuria: Hello correct.
Akshat Jaipuria: So in the loop we had that call directly and based on the outcomes of that we used to call rules and in the next iteration used to call again. in the group call now perception and…
The Admin: Yeah, we added memory card.
Jasmeet A Singh: Thank you.
Akshat Jaipuria: decisions are LM calls.
The Admin: Same as last time.
Akshat Jaipuria: And okay these are the only two kind of LLM possible have in the loop now.
The Admin: There's a third memory one also but I've not explained yet.
Akshat Jaipuria: Okay. Thank you.
Jasmeet A Singh: Six
Sanjana Parida: Rohan can you hear me?
The Admin: I can hear you.
Sanjana Parida: Okay Rohan I have bunch of doubts related to memory. So just now you mentioned that memory is just a JSON file. Maybe in future it can be a radis cache or something right. but where exactly this JSON file stored or…
Sanjana Parida: available for the entire session? Okay.
The Admin: locally on my local computer…
The Admin: where your code is running.
Sanjana Parida: And what is the lifespan or of this entire memory? Like you told it can remember multiple.
The Admin: You never delete it.
Sanjana Parida: It's always persisted in our local Okay.
The Admin: Correct.
Sanjana Parida: And you also mentioned the content of the memory it can be flushed out. So who decides the TTL of the content?
01:25:00
The Admin: You decide.
Sanjana Parida: You decide means is it I create a separate JSON file separately put all my details there.
Sanjana Parida: Is it and that is passed on to the session? Okay, we can also delete every time and…
The Admin: that is also possible…
The Admin: but that is not what we're doing here as the chats happen the memory keeps increasing now as in the programmer decides to delete it or charge GBD decide that I don't like this user I'm deleting everything so completely depends on who's the writer of orchestrator so when I say the writer of the orchestrator decide when to delete can be stored as a reference.
Sanjana Parida: recreate the memory files again and again. Okay, got it. And someone asked about this conversation history like the conversation between when we open a chat and we keep on doing it that is different from the memory now it's clear but that conversation history is also stored as a reference so that is okay.
The Admin: And who decides it? The owner of the orchestrator decides it.
Sanjana Parida: And when we talk the conversation history is passed on as a context. So every time the conversation history gets appended to the context and being passed on to get the new responses is it okay okay Rohan …
The Admin: Orchestrator decides how that needs to be done. If the conversation history is 64 kilobytes and you're sending it to perception, it will die. So as orchestrator owner or architect you need to decide that you need to summarize it and then pass on.
Sanjana Parida: how is it done in the nor normal chat GP or in this okay got it.
The Admin: It looks at a summary or it gets artifact and does a graph search. Okay.
Sanjana Parida: And what is the size of the memory that we can give or it can be anything?
The Admin: can be anything.
Sanjana Parida: 
Sanjana Parida: Find it.
The Admin: Sep. Correct.
sandeep hegde: Yeah, Ron, you said the perception doesn't look at the artifact and it just looks at the idea and it passes it on to a decision, right? so…
sandeep hegde: then how the goals is goal just the query.
The Admin: Goal is just a query.
The Admin: No, goal is whether a query is objectives are met. Objectives are the goals, right?
sandeep hegde: Then if my query is do whatever is there in the document and if I pass a document which is more than 4 KB then the document is considered as an artifact. In this case for perception the initial goal is to do whatever is there in the document and the reading of the document goes to decision and…
sandeep hegde: the decision comes back with the content of the document and that the content is derived it into different goals. Right. Okay.
The Admin: Correct. Okay.
The Admin: Pratip is still not there.
The Admin: Hand. Yeah.
Pradeep E: Yeah, Rohan,…
Pradeep E: can you hear me? I think Akshhat helped answers part of my question which is the two key parts of LLM in this entire flow is the perception and the decision Correct. And any interactions that happens from this LLM is back always to the agent loop. And then I can think of agent loop as a more comprehensive kind of an if else condition. It just has all this code inside it to decide which of these five artifacts to use at any given point in time. And there will never be an LLM in that agent loop.
The Admin: There's no it is always without an okay.
Pradeep E: Or maybe there's a version where this agent loop could also have an LLM layer to it. All right. Thanks,
Hemant Bhambhu: So if we try to understand it from the let's say cloud code perspective. So let's say we ask it something that okay I need this kind of project to be done. So it decided that I need to get these three four Python files then this is the perception part right and then it tries to make some it will go to the decision they will create their python files. So these are artifacts and this goes back to the perception that these Python files have been created and you can update the memory etc.
Hemant Bhambhu: So the memory will be across the different conversation that we start a different conversation and…
Hemant Bhambhu: we were doing different things. So memory will kind of keep track of that. Is that understanding right Is there any limit to…
The Admin: No, wrong memory will not keep track of the artifacts.
01:30:00
The Admin: Artifacts will be kept by the agent loop. There are two memories. Persistent memory and non- Memory is just persistent memory. Things that are fixed. My birthday, my preferences, you like UV. In Python, you are working on Mac OS and so on and so on. Not the intermediate artifact. The reason we call it artifact is because of artifact. It's supposed to be temporary and then deleted. If you put it in memory, then what's the point of calling an artifact there is no limit.
Hemant Bhambhu: 
Hemant Bhambhu: what we can put in the memory? is that
The Admin: You can come up with your own architecture where artifact is also stored in memory for some reason. Completely up to you. Maybe you want to call it archive. A
Akshay M: Yeah my question is with respect to the agent six path.
Akshay M: So if my understanding is correct at the end of this path we have achieved what you want to do right through the perception vision and action so at the end of this path we have achieved what we want to achieve from the beginning of the path right so why do we iterate through mean what happens in the next iteration it's …
The Admin: Louder, please.
The Admin: What's the question exactly? Why or what? The new query,…
Akshay M: if I go through this path we have achieved what we want to achieve right from the And so why do we iterate again? What are we going to do in the next iteration? At the end we have the app.
The Admin: the new query will come in.
Akshay M: Okay.
The Admin: New loop will start.
Akshay M: 
Akshay M: A new loop It can be from the other agent or the username. Okay.
The Admin: Correct. Yes.
praveen v: So the codex and the copellet and anti-gravity in all these have been built on this foundation and if we also come up with our own way of dealing with this cognitive cycle then we can become our own company of the agent.
The Admin: Exactly. this is what you're seeing on the screen clot code is anti-gravity is Perplexity is this is what they solved first and that's what it became. Okay, Sep.
praveen v: Perfect. So it is all about operating this cognitive cycle in your own way so that you are achieving the goals of the users perfectly. Yeah. Perfect. Thank you.
sandip autane: So Rohan I understood the agent loop memory artifacts decision action but I'm not able to get the nature of the perception whether it's a statically coded workflow or it's some dynamic component who is basically looking at artifacts and communicating with alien so I'm trying to understand the nature of the perception right as so it is like
The Admin: Your question is still not clear.
The Admin: dividing task in multiple goals. That's all.
sandip autane: So per agent it is going to be some statically coded workflow or it is some dynamic component which exchange the information and get its perception or idea building.
The Admin: Perception has a prompt and objective is to take the query divide it into multiple goals and see if the past goals are met or not. That's all.
The Admin: That clear and…
sandip autane: Okay.
The Admin: the reason it needs to be call is because someone need to semantically understand whether goal is met or not. it cannot be heristics right perception and…
sandip autane: So, LLM call could go at two places basically perception and decision. Okay.
The Admin: decision and one more call here to decide whether this should become a part of the memory or not. Okay.
sandip autane: Makes sense. Yeah. Thanks.
The Admin: S correct.
Siva: I think you just answered the question. The LLM call will be there in the perception and decision layers. Is that right? And I have one more question.
The Admin: Yes. Alternate.
Siva: So you have enclosed some layers in the dotted lines and mentioned alt. What is that? okay.
The Admin: It may may not happen.
Siva: Fine. Yeah. Thank you.
The Admin: Okay. Anit. Yeah.
Ankit Biswas: This regarding the So perception creates the goal. then decision creates the ways I mean…
Ankit Biswas: how to execute the goals. Then the execution takes place by the action. Artifact ID is sent back to Then perception validates the goal is done partially done or…
The Admin: That is correct.
The Admin: Action may or may not be involved like summarize the website action may not Yeah.
Ankit Biswas: 
Ankit Biswas: or may not. Okay. Yeah, got it.
The Admin: This one's memory.
Soham Harshe: Yeah. Hi everyone. So if I have to think in terms of code, so comparing with our previous agent V5. so now we will have a agent loop where first a perception LLM will be called and then that we used to I mean after the memory part the first LM to hit will be the possession block and then previous agents used to tell out that now a tool call is needed.
01:35:00
Soham Harshe: Similarly, it will say a agent call is needed and then either decision or memory blocks will be called, And okay and then when the output is returned by decision again it will continue the flow and till perception closes its goal and…
The Admin: This one will call this correct.
The Admin: Exactly. The first iteration of that loop I will not say it be it may need eight iterations right iteration is the wrong word the first query will be resolved or…
Soham Harshe: then the first iteration of that loop will be complete. Is that right? Okay. Okay.
The Admin: first query will be solved you can say that Jan you're sending a complex query to the memory
Jatin Pahuja: Sir we are sending a complex query to memory and if we are not getting the and…
Jatin Pahuja: we are not getting the responses that are very efficient and perception has divided into the sub goals and then again if we need the memory then we can also include the memory part again into the iteration.
The Admin: Please wait.
The Admin: Please wait. We are on session six. We have kept everything very simple.
Jatin Pahuja: 
Jatin Pahuja: Okay.
The Admin: If a complex query comes in and…
Jatin Pahuja: Okay.
The Admin: memory is not getting it, will be resolved in the rag session where we try and handle this complex query going to memory and how to extract information from there. That is going to ra session 10 and forward. Okay. VJ.
VJ: Yeah. Hi everyone. my question is how exactly this specdriven architecture where we maintain a file comes into role in this process.
The Admin: What is exactly the question again?
VJ: How exactly the specdriven architecture which we have right where we maintain a MD file in our code. that comes in the role in this process.
The Admin: I have no idea what you're saying. What do you mean by spectriven architecture?
VJ: where we maintain a MD file which helps the agent to…
The Admin: To how is it related to this?
VJ: where the process …
The Admin: How is it related to this …
VJ: where we are maintaining that particular file what is that flow exactly in the context of cloud code I want to know…
The Admin: what we're seeing on the screen that will sit in the memory it becomes one of your preferences. Yeah.
VJ: where exactly is that defining happening where we areing a file All Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
praveen v: Yeah. So the different araches react and…
praveen v: deep agents So they are also built on the same foundation.
The Admin: Exactly. Internally they may have a different way of handling the goals and…
The Admin: launching multiple agents or one by one or that is where it will change.
praveen v: 
praveen v: Got it. Thank you.
The Admin: We are very very close.
Sunil Jakkaraju: So I was just thinking is perception like a intelligent regax parser which not just pattern matching but it is context aware as well and based on that it sends the next step to the decision and decision is like your opposite that analogy correct.
The Admin: It's like adding one drop of lemon into milk and still calling it milk. I can say yes but I don't want to say yes. You have trivialize perception a lot. The most difficult task in the world is to divide a job into multiple goals. It is not pattern matching. That is the most complex job. And that is why when you write this assignment you'll see that decision can actually be a small agent a small LM perception has to be Gemini at least deciding what to do. For example, there's one question that you have to answer three times a day and that you have been answering that question three times a day since you're born and you still don't know the answer. What is the question? You're on average 30 just count the number of times you've answered that question. 365 into let's say at least 30 years, So, you have answered that into three also. So, you answered that question 32,000 times. You still don't know what to eat.
The Admin: So perception is the most important part here. So it's not the rejects.
Sunil Jakkaraju: Okay, thanks.
The Admin: But you're very close. And why decisions job is simple is because a cook simple but thinking roti I need this alooi subzi because alooi was there and tomato was there and today sranti I can't have ps and onion and you ask it to make when your wife is not at home it is going to be a mahav right so you need to remember all of that that's why perception is very important it is going to read the memory the user doesn't like emojis the user is working on Mac the user wants UVI to be there the user
The Admin: has his own library to pass PDF don't install something new user is working on unlimited budget user doesn't want to spend money he only buys from all that information is going to be going to perception so it's not just the reject a very complex beast which needs to understand everything then decide and tell decision what to do okay ashin last question on I don't understand…
01:40:00
Ashwin G: So this per perception is actually constructed or before setting up of any agent we have to write all these set of rules.
The Admin: what you're asking. The whole whatever you're seeing on the screen has to be set up before any query can be processed.
Ashwin G: No, in the sense there will be a lot of interaction with the agents and some things we will be missing so afterwards based on the interaction some of the insights will get gather and…
Ashwin G: that has to be added into the perception or it will be added automatically into the perception. So that can be done.
The Admin: Your question is wrong at three places.
The Admin: M will add to perception. It's a wrong construct itself. Perception with a prompt will be added to the perception by LM again wrong.
The Admin: The agent loop is not LLM and will be added and every time the architecture is same. So the question is wrong at three places you write this loop you set it up then the query goes in and based on what the query is things happen dynamically. Okay.
Ashwin G: Okay.
Ashwin G: Got it.
The Admin: Always gives always our decision to call.
Swapnil Gusani: Does a perception call MCP or tools by its own or always take DCM?
The Admin: So the three properties of this flow that you need to maintain and keep in mind is first memory is consulted at the start Every time the iteration starts the memory is checked. Second, the agent begins each iteration by asking what it already knows before doing any further work. And that can be the last step memory which is temporary or it can be an initial memory that I want. and the reason you need to know this is because we are working in a stateless LLM. Do not assume that you have access to a cache of an LM where it knows already. Right? You have told my birthday in the second loop.' You have to again tell it.
The Admin: Please remember You're working from the architecture side. You're not a consumer of charge GPD. You're making charged. There's a big difference there. You have to tell Chargd Every time charge moves from a Google server to some other server. We have to again inform about the whole preferences. There is no RAM sitting in the world that dedicated to let's say nil. It doesn't say swap. I am married to swapnel and I always remember everything about swap. No. If you do not log into charge GPT it will shut down moment you log in it will again boot up again read the memory it has to be told every single time same is true for us every single loop you have to again inform the same thing you might think it's redundant it's not okay second the attachment of artifact bytes to decision context is decided by perception so perception decides that artifact needs to be read and it is going to be telling the orchestration loop that hey my decision needs to solve that particular code attach artifact
The Admin: So orchestration loop is going to dump everything that was there in the artifact. There's no separate loop where artifact is told that hey read this then artifact is going to write a command or MCP tool to read it and then read no that doesn't happen everything have to make for us right decision has no mechanism to request an artifact directly you can make an artif you can make a agent like that which can request to read that is completely separate story but not here maybe the query itself was that find a file and read it if that was there in that case in the first step itself it will find the file then the next decision is going to be told that you found a file last
The Admin: and now read it. So that is a very micro loop that you need to keep in mind. Third, the verifier loop is the perception itself. So now we are actually saving that part. Right? We do not have to see at the end of one loop that things were done properly or not because we anyways informing So perception has two jobs. Now one is to describe the whole query into multiple goals and second before it says that goal is done or not verify the goal whether the last step was done properly or not. So perception really has two jobs. It is perceiving the environment. Perception is at your home sitting next to you deciding what to be done. I hope you get If you get this concept clear that most of the husbands are decision makers, you will understand what is the meaning of decision maker. Somebody has told guy that this is what you have to do. Right?
The Admin: I hope you get this very very simple nuance of every single family there is someone who's perceiving everything deciding what you are going to decide right very important okay and perception of course is going to reevaluate now moment we okay so the reason is it's not that I'm trying to trivialize or I'm going to bully one particular gender but it becomes easy to understand that's why I keep bringing this wife up because every one of us goes through this decision husband perception is wife now the last guy who said that perception just rejects. Do you think it just a rejects now?
01:45:00
The Admin: Can you imagine the amount of emotions that are coming through or the amount of information it goes through remembers everything doesn't look at the artifact right talk about visa creation let's say want to make a apply for a visa will not read any artifact pass on everything to you find that do it yourself the decision has to sit and file this and that right so the perception is the main person here going back to the
The Admin: old boring stuff the pyantic contracts we have contracts of how to say what to speak what to tell our neighbors how do we tell our neighbors how do we decide what to say so in this case memory for example is structured like this in my case you can come up with your own schema in my case I have a kind of memory that is where at the end of each loop is going to decide whether this is a fact it's a preference tool outcome or a scratch pad we have four kinds of memory scratch pad is temporary inside the memory also that can also be deleted right again a feature that you can create if you want to outcome is supposed to be added to make sure that we can inform our perception. The tool actually worked very well. I can build interesting someone was asking the tool failed. Can I do something? So yes, the tool outcome the tool was called and the tool failed. So that is stored here. Preferences I like coffee without sugar. My birthday is that and not I live at that particular location. Right? what is the difference between fact and Preferences can change. I like coffee tomorrow I may not want.
The Admin: I will want something today but tomorrow I may not because it's Wednesday and Wednesday you don't eat non for example then there are keywords it's essentially a list of things that are stored inside there's a descriptor one short human readable live this is for each item by the way that we are storing in the memory right it's a memory item you're reading then we have value it's a dictionary then you have the artifact ID this is where the artifact is stored temporary and when deleted then we have source where the source came from was this particular URL was it decision then you have run ID
The Admin: for what run have we stored it then we have a goal id which go is maintained then what was the confidence that were returned to us for this spec this memory item might look like one full block but what gets stored out of this is very simple things we only stored the kind and the value for that everything else is temporary so I'm maintaining the artifact and the persistent memory within one class but both of them can be separate also then the artifact is literally ID and the content type is string whatever comes in goes into an artifact with this particular id is passed on.
The Admin: Earlier when I wrote this whole content you're going to see the id is a string and then we passing the content type which is also a string but the decision was going to a weaker lm and when the ID was going as a string for example sha 256/45698 it starts hallucinating it starts getting confused in fact perception also starts creating its own unique numbers right the artifact was a string like a 256 byt number so it will always be unique. The problem is that you're forcing 11 to repeat that number. It is difficult, It will not be able to create 4 6 8 9 k a x k qp and k and big star.
The Admin: So I just swapped it to a id which is integer 1 2 3 4 simple and it says okay read the fourth read the fifth ID read the seventh ID right for example if you go on a website and the URL is very complex you can't even speak out that URL right so we just like to say that okay go on this particular school of one or school schoolofair eagv3 simpler then we have a goal goal is also maintained because it needs to be passed on to the decision the goal has a string
The Admin: ID the text the bool done or not and the artifact attached if not right so we just add the ID here and automatically goes to the decision so everything becomes very simple that's why parenting is super interesting then observation which is the list of goals our perception creates this observation class object where it just lists all the goals in the list and then we can manage two done item three done simple anyway tool call what was the tool what are the arguments we call we send it to our MCP server it does his works and then we have the output and finally we have a Decision output is very simple. We have answer string which is either I'm done or the population of Paris is ABCD or that particular tool. Right? So everything is just this literally. So if you give this to your plot I'm hoping that we'll be able to solve Other half problem is going to be on the prompt side which is the complex part. So the boundaries between the rows are well defined here.
The Admin: Memory reads, right? It's going to return the list of memory items. Perception next step returns the decision outputs. Action is going to return a tuple with a string of whatever thing is done. Everything becomes very simple. And this is where parantic rule becomes important because now we have multiple tools being called and all of that has to survive the loop because everything is pantic. If something is sent as a string becomes integer because you want it. If something is JSON internally it can clean that up. Everything can happen in the pyandic stuff and one can talk to each other in a much better memory as a type service right now in session six memory is a type service. There is no LLM involved inside the memory to Write it.
01:50:00
The Admin: We will add something where because you need to understand it's a fact or it's a preference or it's artifact that needs to be decided later on. we need some complex mechanism for it. But read is very simple. You send something it just searches using rejects keyword search and just gives it back to you. Now the service sits besides the loop as an external store and it's called whenever the loop is required to consult it. in the last time we just had a very simple recall We were just seeing whether we had something similar or not. But now we have bifocated this. This is going to become more complex as we move forward and memory is going to be the thing that understands you and all your preferences in future. So there are facts the preferences the tool outcomes and the scratch pile. Now fact is It's a observed The meaning of durable is that is saved in the JSON. Right? So your class or memory py needs to make it durable.
The Admin: For example, John's office is in HSR Bangalore. Then we have The user stated inferred preference, Either the user has said no, I like this or prefer you have seen it through his discussion that he is Python only. Then you have tool outcome the record dispatch. this is completely up to you. You want to make it durable or right now it doesn't make sense because you're not going to be using this tool or this memory a lot. But moment you deploy it, you're going to see that you may want to remember how many times a particular website failed or how many times a particular search failed or particular tool failed. Then you can collect the statistics and make it better why it failed is also captured here. And then we have a scratch pad a runscoped working node which is limited to the loop that is running after once it run because you not store it that is gone in planner state during current run is something that we can save.
The Admin: So the four kind of maps into the 3D memory system of the session 7. you're going to see that we are going to introduce a new layer called Remy which is remember me that is only focusing on So the preferences part will become slightly more complex for us and fact is a fact. We just keep a list of facts that are going to be there. Right now we're just keeping all of them in a fixed memory class. Okay. It's okay.
Swapnil Gusani: Can you go back to the identic contracts? So here in artifact …
The Admin: Which one?
Swapnil Gusani: how does it describe where that artifact is it source or…
The Admin: That is the class, right? We are storing it here.
Swapnil Gusani: but where is the pointer or address of the actual information the data it's ID right is it source okay it could be a file path or…
The Admin: It's here.
The Admin: Yeah, it is also a string,…
Swapnil Gusani: a bad news.
The Admin: right? But it's still an object string,…
Swapnil Gusani: So it could be a file basically.
The Admin: we are only interested in web searches.
Swapnil Gusani: It is an object string but then you will also have your decision also has to use artifact and actually catch the file content. Right. Okay.
The Admin: Moment you have PDF, CA files and all this is become going to become very complex. We are in session six.
Swapnil Gusani: And when you say you are keeping ID a string. currently you are making it count 1 2 3 4. But what happens if there are lots of artifacts?
The Admin: What is the biggest number you can think of?
Swapnil Gusani: No, but won't it hallucinate in that case?
The Admin: No, you're telling it the artifact 68.
Swapnil Gusani: 
Swapnil Gusani: But you said if the ID is random or it's a big number then it can hallucinate right?
The Admin: Yeah, if it is like this then can have a net. Compared to 3 4 5 600, this is still 342,000. A big number, but still manageable.
Swapnil Gusani: Is it better to give it a semantic touch also the ID like a label or…
The Admin: No, you can try that.
Swapnil Gusani: or Okay.
The Admin: As I said, I tried it. Everything was hallucinating. So I preferred that one particular loop may not create more than thousand artifacts and thousand numbers are still better because create when you say semantic you again introducing LM call. Someone is going to look at the content and decide this is a Wikipedia artifact.
The Admin: I'm going to store it like Wikipedia dash something right again becomes complex send no as I said this is the first class…
01:55:00
Sanjana Parida: Rohan, the memory that you described below, can you show now or later once the class is over a example of this memory file how it looks like and…
The Admin: where the code will not be shared after the assignment submitted…
Sanjana Parida: okay and…
The Admin: then I'll share my code and one can refer in next session after the assignment submission of this session. Okay.
Sanjana Parida: that there you will show how the memory file is also create what the structure of the memory file and all right in that code. got it.
The Admin: ction loud.
Akshay M: maybe same as so you have an object you add a class which describes the memory blocks right so we have a class which defines the memory object right so is my understanding correct that…
The Admin: This is the class where we're defining a memory object. It's just coming as an assignment. So if you're scared then it's good. But in next session I will share the memory array of memory objects is correct.
Akshay M: then we are array of memory objects Yeah. Okay.
The Admin: Other
Atul Dumrewal: So just to understand one thing in regards to perception. Let's say you have given it a task and it figures out that the breakdown of the individual items is this. then when it passes it to decision and…
Atul Dumrewal: decision returns an output to it, it still remembers in context of the previous breakdowns which it had done or does it just try to figure out it again like the next step.
The Admin: It's wrong question.
The Admin: Tell me why the question is wrong.
The Admin: What is it here? Perception cannot do anything unless Exactly.
Atul Dumrewal: perception unless the agent calls it.
The Admin: So who needs to do all of this perception yes I really want all of you to bring it to your consciousness that the agent here is not memory perception artifact decision action the agent loop is the the Python loop
Atul Dumrewal: So basically the breakdown would happen and it would be fed to the agent and the agent would store it into context and then feed it down to decision and In the next cycle. Yes. Mhm.
The Admin: Python class that you write is the agent. All the other things is also a tool if you think about it. Just something comes in, something comes out.
Atul Dumrewal: Got it. Yeah. Thanks.
The Admin: Full detail everything.
Pandurang Patil: What goes in the conversation history? Is it just a query and the final output which is so if a perception identifies some actions to be done or decisions to be done and…
The Admin: What? Yes.
Pandurang Patil: if decision reads the artifact take some decisions and make some actions. So all of this activity that is happening that also goes into conversation.
The Admin: Has to go into conversation. All of this is the part of the conversation.
The Admin: Memory item artifact goal of the vision tool call. It is an output.
Pandurang Patil: 
Pandurang Patil: Okay. But what needs to be sent to LLM is something to be decided by the perception.
The Admin: Perception is also an LLM.
Pandurang Patil: Yeah. what I'm trying to so earlier the way I was perceiving the agent flow would be that whatever convers yes okay so I can also…
The Admin: Okay, I'll simplify it to you. Whatever goes to perception is the aic loop. whatever goes to decision is decided by the perception. Okay, that's Whatever goes to action is decided by the decision.
The Admin: Whatever goes to memory is decided all the history information needs to go to perception.
Pandurang Patil: if I'm writing my agent I can decide All the history information goes to perception. so in turn it should go to the LLM call.
The Admin: In the perception it will go to alarm call.
Pandurang Patil: Okay.
The Admin: Yes, perception is literally a prompt plus information going to LM.
Pandurang Patil: And I give them.
The Admin: You will be handling in future.
Poornima T A: so whatever we are doing here we have assumed a single user so session or something doesn't come into picture and we'll be handling it in future okay so this is considering a single user in a single session the history and…
02:00:00
The Admin: Yes. Correct.
Poornima T A: anything. Okay.
The Admin: Finish.
Manish Kapoor: So Rohan you said that the architecture is stateless right?
Manish Kapoor: So every time we have to send the information again to the loop.
The Admin: The architecture is stateful.
The Admin: The LMS are stateless.
Manish Kapoor: Okay go I have the understanding. Yeah. So this is our solution.
The Admin: Okay. S Yes.
Satya Nayak: Yeah, in this u pentic class you have mentioned artifact id string. so again you suggested also it can be integer right?
The Admin: And I'm intentionally not changing because I wanted to go through the pain. So if people who are not attending the class or not listening to this, they will make the mistake and struggle. Correct.
Satya Nayak: And the other part I question is in the sequence diagram. So in the second flow you're calling as the observation goal and then we calling the gate byes. So that is where artifacts is brought into picture. Right. So…
Satya Nayak: who is calling that? So perception or…
The Admin: agent loop.
The Admin: We call that send it to I'll come to that.
Satya Nayak: okay agent loop separately. as per the requirement it will call that effect and keep it in okay got it. Thank you.
Anubhav Panda: Yeah. is writing to memory also where a tool called perception decides? sorry DC and the number of LLM calls that has to be done that is decided by us in the orchestrator orchestration.
The Admin: That's correct.
Ashwin Kotian: Yeah. Hi Ron. Am I audible?
The Admin: Yes. Repeat louder.
Ashwin Kotian: Yeah. You mentioned about this artifact ID. So does it lie with the agentic loop to assign this ID?
Ashwin Kotian: Yeah, you mentioned about the artifact ids, So does it lie with the agent loop to assign these ids or where does it come from? Sorry. Okay.
The Admin: Yes, automatic incremental correct it's automatic incremental so when you say attach to I don't know…
Ashwin Kotian: So, it lies with the aotic group on the way.
The Admin: because it's quite possible that three four artifacts are created in a loop so it's automatic the next artifact gets an X ID.
Ashwin Kotian: Okay.
The Admin: Basically, look at the log.
Ashwin Kotian: So, from a user point of view, I mean if at all you need to debug it, then how would you go about it? Okay. No good.
Hemant Bhambhu: So there will be many tools available. Does the perception decide for each decision which tools are available to it? Okay.
The Admin: Not in session In future maybe but right now all tools are dumb to the decision which is a bad thing but that's where we are sundep that is you describing pyic in more words.
sandeep hegde: Yeah Rohan in last session we have seen the concepts like canonical requests and observability structured output and all right so as per my understanding those were the building blocks and whatever yeah yeah those were like the building blocks and…
The Admin: We are using pyic here.
sandeep hegde: right now whatever we are seeing these are different architectural components and going forward whenever we are trying to do the assignment instead of I mean simply using the Gemini and all try to do some assignment so we have to consciously use these concepts right so that is how we are trying to build an agent right
The Admin: Correct.
The Admin: Right. Okay. L man. Yeah.
lakshmanarao vanimisetti: The very first item like we are looking for in the memory right the agent loop starts with looking in the memory. Are we doing some keyword search or are we doing some co similarities or something like that or how it will be like querying the memory reg.
The Admin: As I said, we're keeping very simple some reject search.
Nawaz Ali: Rohan, can you hear me?
The Admin: Yeah. No,…
Nawaz Ali: Rohan, one dumb question. the system in the past where we had system prompt, user query, what functions being called, arguments, all of those will be done by the decision. Is that correct or is it wrong?
The Admin: You need to write one for perception. You need to write one for decision. what is the question?
02:05:00
Nawaz Ali: I'm sorry, I'm not able to follow you later. Right. So now the functions that will be called the LLM will decide that okay I'll call this function these are the arguments.
The Admin: What is the going to do? Decision just given a prompt that you are going to write and the objective or a goal that is given by the perception. That's correct. Yeah. Once you Yes.
Nawaz Ali: So where would that be happening okay so that is independent like that that's part of the agent loop.
The Admin: how it happened last time. You have a system prompt for decision then the list of MCP tools and then that is completely independent. So whatever last session we need to follow it here.
Nawaz Ali: Okay. Okay. That's it. Thanks.
The Admin: Okay. Amit.
Amit T: Just a quick question. Can you hear me by the way?
The Admin: Yes. memory is a metadata artifact.
Amit T: If can I say the memory in this particular setup the memory is a meta data for artifact.
The Admin: You are thousand kilometers away if you're making that statement. a artifact is completely different.
Amit T: Sorry. Not really.
The Admin: Are we clear? Yes.
Amit T: I'm feel like maybe I missed first five minutes of the session.
The Admin: It was not the first five artifact is a completely different thing. it is something that a tool creates. It is so big that we do not want to create a part of the memory. We are clear on this.
Amit T: Yes. Yes.
The Admin: Now this is dumped onto the decision to handle few things and only Decision is forced to read it. We clear on this. in the memory we are storing the artifa If some ID was used, we're not storing the artifact for this particular tool problem.
Amit T: Yes. Yes.
The Admin: I referred to Morrison Boyd chemistry book. I'm not storing the book. I'm just storing the name ID of the book. What is the question now?
Amit T: So that's the reason why I asked whether memory is an memory.
Amit T: Memory is like a metadata for the artifact and…
The Admin: artifact is one of the poorest thing that it needs to handle and…
The Admin: that is not you can say that but it's not persistent Yes.
Amit T: as whenever you have artifact ID if it's none then it is not but when it is there if the ID is present then memory that particular memory item acts as a metadata for that artifact ID is Okay.
The Admin: One of the thousand use cases of memory is that the main use case is to store the preferences in fact permanently.
Amit T: Yes. Okay. so in short memory is the RAM and…
The Admin: you're saying not at all.
Amit T: and artifact is the hard disk in that context.
The Admin: Artifact that is the SLT temp folder on your Windows.
Amit T: No. I get it. Okay. Thank you.
The Admin: What you're trying to say is one of the use case of Audi class is to kill a person on road.
The Admin: Okay. Money.
Mani R: When we talk about the followup question when we talk about the roles the LM is playing that means we are giving system prompt in all areas like memory perception vision and…
Mani R: action all areas…
The Admin: Which of these four Memory has LLM.
Mani R: 
Mani R: but I understand as of now.
The Admin: Yes. Yes or no? Memory has LLM.
Mani R: No. Yes.
The Admin: Perception LM. Yes. Needs a system prompt. Artifact has LLM.
Mani R: No. Yes.
The Admin: No. Design has LM. Yes. It needs a system prompt. Action has LM.
Mani R: No. But after action we still need the LLM to store the file in memory
The Admin: No. Doesn't need the prompt. Okay. your question. No. Storing is No M in the world A store is an action itself is LM right…
sandeep hegde: Deciding what to store and what not to store is element.
The Admin: but the execution has to be done That code runs on your computer by the CPU.
The Admin: clear on this. You're not saying yes, which means you're not clear on it. Ask again. I can hear you. Go ahead.
02:10:00
Mani R: Yeah. Can you hear?
Mani R: Yeah. Basically, after action, we still need to analyze and put the things in memory, right? So,…
Mani R: there also I don't know. So I'm asking that even in action also we need a system prompt to specify the LM to do some sort of work for me right?
The Admin: Once it is stored and…
The Admin: if needs to be analyzed then we need an LM. That is No store a file. That is something my computer can do. Action means go to a URL. Okay.
The Admin: Do I need LLM to open this website? That's not need. Right. This is action.
Mani R: No. Yes.
Mani R: Yes. Yes.
The Admin: Do I need to understand what happened? What is there on the screen? Yeah, that is not action. That is perception or that is a decision part. So there you need something. So whenever we are executing a command, whenever we downloading something, whenever we are creating something, no LM is required because that's a fixed thing.
Mani R: Yes. Okay.
The Admin: So action doesn't need any LLM. After the casing,…
Mani R: Okay,…
The Admin: after downloading part, after we need to do something, we need to send it back to some LM to understand whether the thing was done properly or not. Okay.
Mani R: Got it. Yeah.
The Admin: So, yes,…
Soham Harshe: So let's say when perception decides to trigger a decision agent will it also give specific instructions for particular task.
The Admin: 100%. So, what perception will do?
The Admin: perception will create a parentic thing for a goal, It will create the ID of the goal.
Soham Harshe: Okay.
The Admin: It will create a string for the task and will basically store done or not or if some artifact ID is required or not, So, if you basically just look at this part, you'll understand what is the role of the perception send to.
Soham Harshe: And then this goal is attached to decision like Okay.
The Admin: So it was going to create a id for example id number one text going to be do this and it is done or not it's going to be saying no it's not done bool basically so it's going to say false okay and…
The Admin: some artifact ID that is going to be let's say 47 ID this directly goes to a decision design se I'm working on a goal number one and the task is still not done and this is what I need to do this is artifact sent to
Soham Harshe: And second question is so if per perception wants to attach a memory item to decision…
Soham Harshe: then it will be done in a similar manner as it is done for artifact.
The Admin: Repeat again.
Soham Harshe: So if perception wants to attach a memory item for particular task and decision, how about …
The Admin: One second. That is also possible if a artifact is there, perception can only attach it by mentioning the ID of the artifact. If it is not an artifact then is part of the prompt that goes which is what is the task? What is the goal that is memory?
Soham Harshe: if it also has to attach some memory item Okay.
The Admin: Memory is text remember LM can only take text in. So this whole thing memory and instruction. So this is your goal. This is instruction. This is memory.
Soham Harshe: …
The Admin: This memory is the golden one second.
Soham Harshe: memory is preloaded and then the wall is created. Okay. No, I'm referring that if something needs to be retrieved from Yeah.
The Admin: Let's say your perception. Instruct me that I need to go out and…
The Admin: get a red rose for you. Tell me what you will say. your perception I'm decision I'm asking you to tell me that Rowan go out and…
Soham Harshe: And…
Soham Harshe: it will go out to a particular location that the user So it will no okay…
The Admin: get me a red rose instruct me anybody else can play this game with me Siraj do you understand…
Mani R: No, no.
Ammar Adil: Rohan, can you please bring a red rose for me?
The Admin: what I'm saying okay he has used memory
The Admin: He did use he has to remember the red rose. That's why the instruction is apart from that. instruct me take this book out.
Ammar Adil: Get me that.
Soham Harshe: but for the same example if the instruction is that get a red rose from a favorite shop and if favorite shop location has to be retrieved from the memory…
The Admin: That is not possible.
Soham Harshe: then how okay okay okay got
The Admin: perception has to retrieve and give it to the decision or decision has to have a tool to look at the memory and fetch it. Okay.
02:15:00
The Admin: S no no no no no again fundamental difference in…
Sairaj Nadaf: Yeah, like you said the perception will tell the decision to go to the artifacts and read everything and do the task, right? Yeah.
The Admin: what you're saying your understanding may be correct but very big fundamental different if I tell decision to read an artifact what will decision do it will take the query run a tool fetch a detail and then read it correct that is not what is happening If the perception wants to read the artifact,…
Sairaj Nadaf: Look like this.
The Admin: it is going to dump the ID to the erv to our Agentic loop will dump the artifact directly on the decision. So decision will be told here's the artifact that you have to read whole artifact. There is no process of sending the artifact ID to the Decision is dumped with the artifact directly. Here's the book read. Yeah.
Sairaj Nadaf: Yeah. Yeah, that's nice. So after artifacts the task is done the artifacts you said will be erased right?
The Admin: Yes, temporary it is there.
Sairaj Nadaf: Yeah. the ID that stored in the me memory the artifact ID what happened to that …
The Admin: Completely depend on you want to make it persistent you can write it to be persistent.
Sairaj Nadaf: if that again want to call that same artifact ID so Yes.
The Admin: You are the orchestrator u architect. Yes. You need to decide whether you need to show the artifact or not. you're telling me if I make the ID persistent but if I delete then how will I read it?
Sairaj Nadaf: Yeah. …
The Admin: Means you as an architect have done a mistake.
The Admin: If you want to make the feature available then the whole artifact need to be referenced in future. You need to save That is your job.
Sairaj Nadaf: that's good.
The Admin: Put him.
Poornima T A: One request Rohan at this point we've got most of it we have some gaps here and there can you take one example and go through that flow diagram I think most of our questions will be answered I know yes…
The Admin: I've done that for half an hour. Okay, I'll do it again. Manish.
Poornima T A: but after all these questions now if you do it it may cement things in our mind we may get thank
Manish Kapoor: So yeah Rohan so we are using pentic class right python object for our data which will be traveling within between LLMs. the point is as you said the decision will call the tool and…
Manish Kapoor: it will create the artifact or retrieve the artifact right and then again the goes to perception whether we have to read it or not based upon whether the artifact is correctly created or…
The Admin: H no no no no a Python code can have error will pentic find Operational error is only operational error.
Manish Kapoor: The same thing is also happening at padentic level because it will validate at the time of creation itself right so aren't we no okay that so I thought it's more of a generation error that pentic identifies Okay.
The Admin: Is a string is it corrupted or not? Can I read it? That's all. Okay.
Manish Kapoor: Okay. Okay. Got it. Yeah.
Sanjana Parida: Rohan you mentioned about that initially the memory file that we were talking about you told we can keep it like we can create that when I say the user can create that and now when you were discussing about the perception and decision like the red rose thing you told that is also memory so is it like that the memory file that is existing is it getting updated with that information of red
Sanjana Parida: rows into it and then it is being passed to the decision. Sorry, I got confused there.
The Admin: No, in the last question the memory being referred by my end was a temporary memory of the loop in that discussion.
Sanjana Parida: Got it. And it is nothing to do with the memory file that we have.
The Admin: No, but had the question was Rohan go me go and get my favorite color rose then the memory needs to be involved.
Sanjana Parida: And the session memory that we were talking about this red rose is it like the cache or something of this entire agentic loop?
The Admin: Yeah, that is what you're maintaining and what you are attaching every time in the last class the context.
Sanjana Parida: The context got. Okay.
The Admin: Can the decision cause some action that creates a file?
Rahul Kumar: Yeah, I'm having the u the basic understanding confusion. So when this artifact ID is very first time it is getting created at the time of okay so at the time of action it creates the artifacts and then the artifact ids is being given to the perception right.
02:20:00
The Admin: Correct.
Rahul Kumar: So let's say at the perception when we are splitting into the multiple goals it is having multiple goals and each goal might have certain attachments also right the related files what we had given it okay or it might happen that the individual goal might again check into the memory and get back certain documents certain informations then again like those artifacts Not artifacts. I think memory does not have the artifacts.
Rahul Kumar: It is having my question is the understanding of this whole flow.
The Admin: What is the question?
The Admin: The whole flow …
Rahul Kumar: Okay.
The Admin: what happens is every time a new artifact is created and it is told to the perception it is told when this artifact was created with a unique ID. So if in the overall conversation or chat we have 100 artifacts created all of those are being told in the sequential order to the perception. Second time we created this artifact. Fourth, fifth, sixth, seven, we have achieved all of these goals. Now the perception takes a call. my next goal needs to have the artifact number 48 because it's contextually linked to that history.
Rahul Kumar: So when you say the artifact number 48 that do you mean this is the conversation history artifacts or…
The Admin: Artifact number is a part of the conversation history.
Rahul Kumar: conversation history is the part of the artifacts right?
The Admin: Reverse artifact number is a part of the conversation history.
Rahul Kumar: Okay artifacts number is a part of the conversation history. So agent first goes to the memory checks it okay and then along with That's…
The Admin: Agent goes to the memory and checks it. No. First, why will agent go to the memory and check it? Agent? No.
Rahul Kumar: how the various starting phase yeah agent will go to the memory checks it…
The Admin: No. Agent goes to the memory and check it. Okay. Continue.
Rahul Kumar: if re relevant information is there or not along with the u relevant information it will give to the perception perception will read the history and all it will create the different goals okay the goals will again being checked whether it has certain attachments or…
Rahul Kumar: not Okay. Then those attachment can be also a artifacts.
The Admin: Cut it.
Rahul Kumar: Those perceptions are having these goals. And those goals are being thrown to the decision to act on Through the agent orchestrator. Then that decision is deciding whether it's is to call the tool or…
The Admin: Cut it. maybe. Yes.
Rahul Kumar: So then in the tool certain actions and then XN then again the artifacts is being created at the time of action after recalling the tool and then again the artifacts is being created. Then again thrown back to the perception again.
The Admin: Artifact ID. Yes.
Rahul Kumar: Artifact ID only being thrown to the perception again.
Rahul Kumar: But why this artifact ID are being again from the accident is being thrown to the perception.
The Admin: It needs to know…
The Admin: what happened.
Rahul Kumar: So in one user query only all everything is happening…
The Admin: All the goals are not done.
Rahul Kumar: until when it will keep on going let's say finally it is triggering to till all the goals are not done. So let's say the three goals are there. So three times the action is creating the artifacts going to the again perception looking into it what decision whether it is to hand over to the decision through the agent orchestrator then it will keep on doing it until all goals are met.
The Admin: Correct.
Rahul Kumar: Got it. Thank you.
sandeep hegde: Yeah Rohan you said to the decision we won't send the artifact ID instead we dump the entire artifact right is it more of an architectural decision or…
sandeep hegde: we can send the artifact ID also and decision can find those artifact ids and continue Right.
The Admin: Your last statement is wrong,…
The Admin: I let us say I send 10 artifact ID to decision. What will it do?
sandeep hegde: It can find out those artfacts, Based on the artifact ID and source. …
The Admin: It cannot find out an artifact ID based on it. It will call MCP tool and MCP tool has an artifact. what will happen? How does it get the content of the artifact back? someone has to dump it,…
sandeep hegde: Okay.
The Admin: right? How will the decision read something?
sandeep hegde: That reading should happen. You are saying okay okay.
The Admin: Someone has to dump on it, Decision can only decide to call a tool based on information provided.
The Admin: So information provided must have the artifact not ID right you realize this the input to decision is only the text if it decides to okay exactly Okay.
02:25:00
sandeep hegde: Got it. So, we have to extract the artifact and then send the just text input to decision. So basically decision is like an LLM sitting and we have to send that JSON Got it.
The Admin: Yes. Okay.
sandeep hegde: 
sandeep hegde: And the second question is regarding the session memory So whenever these individual tasks getting happen like perception calling decision doing some action and…
sandeep hegde: getting back to perception and all so we have to maintain this memory right inside the agent loop. So do we keep creating a JSON file and…
The Admin: Yeah, you are an architect.
sandeep hegde: keep appending to it or we have to just append it into a query and send it along the loop.
The Admin: You need to decide.
sandeep hegde: Okay, it's left us.
The Admin: Okay. No,…
Swapnil Gusani: So either we dump the entire artifact data on the decision or the decision calls it using a tool and gets is the same, right? it's going to H.
The Admin: No, it's not the same. Let's say agent decides to read a file using a It calls MCP agent and then what happens? Someone has to dump it to decision, How does decision decides to dump something to itself? It cannot.
Swapnil Gusani: It would be a result of the tool called it.
The Admin: T tool call result goes to perception…
The Admin: where in the…
Swapnil Gusani: No decision…
The Admin: where in the loop the tool call result goes to decision.
Swapnil Gusani: if the decision calling the tool then the tool call will go to decision or…
The Admin: No never happened.
Swapnil Gusani: is it that when the decision calls a tool the result is still taken by perception. Is that it?
The Admin: No result is still taken by that will always happen.
The Admin: The loop is Perception, decision, action. Memory p. That is why it's MPA. the loop is always like that. There is no last session also didn't happen.
Swapnil Gusani: So decision doesn't know whether the tool call happened successfully or not. The decision is still an LLM…
The Admin: Last session that's why we had a verifier.
sandeep hegde: I think Rowan we are imagining decision to be one Python method and we are thinking why we simply extract the data before actual LLM call happens instead.
Swapnil Gusani: but if it has access to tools but the response of the tool is not seen by decision it is simply firing and forgetting the end the system deals with
The Admin: Yes, you should have asked this question last time that…
The Admin: why do we have a verifier? Resident calls a tools and forgets it. Tool may fail. Then when the tool fails, we tell that the last time you called this tool,…
The Admin: it It will call different tool is called and then The data has to be sent to decision by someone. That is happening by Only perception can talk to the…
Swapnil Gusani: In that case,…
Swapnil Gusani: let's say the artifact is too big for the decision to take into context. What happens now? Okay.
The Admin: then the router will decide that the artifact is very big. I need to call Gemini. Okay.
The Admin: Sra action.
Sanjana Parida: Rohan, can you repeat where is the ping of artifact ID and the actual artifact happens and where it is stored.
The Admin: Whenever action creates something and that something is more than 4 kilobyte, it automatically becomes artifact in the program where you need to write a goal.
Sanjana Parida: It can be anywhere.
Sanjana Parida: Based on our architecture, it can be stored anywhere, right? Okay, got
The Admin: It can store anywhere.
The Admin: Let us understand this loop once again.
Nawaz Ali: If I may suggest can we take the example where schedule the lunch meeting with John on his birthday the example that you had with that…
The Admin: Okay, the question came in that schedule remind me to wish my friend birthday next week and…
Nawaz Ali: if we can go through the loop.
The Admin: schedule a meeting or dinner at 7 something like that came in. that came inside the agent loop. So birthday came in. then the name of John address came in. It went inside a history. Check the Memory had the address mentioned of 47 people and the address of 47 people. So all of that 100 memory items became part of the loop. Are we good till here? the address of my driver, everything is dumped in because we are using a dumb memory access system right now because this is session six. Okay, that is called hits, right?
02:30:00
The Admin: I have the handles and the descriptors. all address all birthdays, everything is dumped here. Now that is being sent to perception in the observe that we have a ping class for observe object that has a query u remind me to wish my birthday blah blah blah and schedule a meeting or dinner at his address. all the hits goes with all the history. What is the history right now? Anyone?
Satya Nayak: Conver.
Swapnil Gusani: It's empty. And maybe the system comp also.
The Admin: No, that is zero right now. There is no loop that has run till now. You clear?
pratyush kumar: This is the memory.
The Admin: Yeah, history is not the memory. History is the agentic loop temporary conversation. is the context basically. Let's call history context. Okay. how many prior goals are there?
Swapnil Gusani: None. Mhm.
Hari Prasath: Zero.
The Admin: That goes to perception.
The Admin: Are we clear?
sandeep hegde: Yes.
The Admin: No. This is not a reject match already,…
Poornima T A: Yes.
The Admin: Because a reject has already failed. It has 747 addresses, 47 birth dates and everything. Now, Perception decides that okay, John in based on all the data, John's birthday on this. So, I need to what is One of my goal becomes that put a calendar entry on 7th of May. What is Other goal is to remind the user on 7th of May. What is the Third goal is to schedule a dinner using let's say maybe in the preference zumato on a restaurant that is closer to this particular address. So these are three goals that are there and maybe fourth is confirm back and…
pratyush kumar: That's
The Admin: inform the user. There are four goals that are set based on this conversation. We clear on this. Okay.
Poornima T A: Yes.
The Admin: Not separate architecture in the current architecture is stupid right have we added a human in loop you have to update it right now our architecture is stupid does not have common sense…
Swapnil Gusani: just one question.
Swapnil Gusani: What if there are more than one Johns in those hits will it ask immediately won't go ahead in articles?
The Admin: if there's more than one job it may actually need to come back to and ask if it is part of the system prompt otherwise it will just pick the
sandip autane: and Rohan in perception that we have got so our prompt is like that right that we are asking LLM to break this input into the actions or…
The Admin: Yes. Yes.
sandip autane: task is driven by the okay
The Admin: Correct. Okay.
The Admin: So, of course it will not That is session 1415.
Swapnil Gusani: So this agent won't be able to ask whether…
Swapnil Gusani: which Jon are you talking about that okay that is a next session
The Admin: I want all of you to ask me question before I explain this. Do you have any other questions? Sep. Okay.
Nawaz Ali: Rohan history when you say context can you get some more information out there like a function being called arguments result of that function call. Thanks.
sandip autane: So I'm good.
sandeep hegde: No.
The Admin: What happened in the last loop?
The Admin: Yes, Artifact attachment etc etc. What did any other question Jin Pratik?
Prateek Panjla: Yeah. Hi, I heard something about at least there being me no goals.
The Admin: Yeah, it will directly answer the question.
Prateek Panjla: What would an agent with no goals look like? Did I misheard? Okay. Okay. Thanks.
The Admin: I think yeah goals correct.
varun: So here the observe went to perception and…
varun: observation came out the four observations you said right inside the perception there's a prompt which will direct the LM to get these objectives observations right and the goals and it will pass back to the agent loop right it has access to any other things other than the prompt and…
varun: the lm prompt and the input the observe of these four arguments like toes or anything else.
The Admin: no tools.
varun: No, understood. Thank you.
The Admin: Do not want to ask any other question till I done on the loop side finish zero.
Dinesh C: Yeah. here the first time when I send the query what is the history here…
02:35:00
The Admin: That's why I wrote zero.
Dinesh C: but when it will happen the for example if it is more than zero what will be the scenario? Okay.
The Admin: for that I have finished one loop.
The Admin: I have not finished one loop deep I'll answer after I finish this.
Deepak T S: What's the u difference between agent loop orchestration and planning? Yes.
The Admin: Okay, let's start from a scratch. remind me where is it? press Q.
The Admin: Okay, remind me to wish John his birthday next week and book a table of two for dinner near his office. Agent loop puts the query and sends it to the memory. Memory is just a simple keyword based system which is going to look at John, birthday and some other stuff. So in one line you find John birthday or any birthday or address and etc. It's just going to collect all of those document. It's a very bad system but that's where we are today because we session six and all that is dumped back to the agent group.
The Admin: Any question regarding this only? Okay. What is the question?
Pandurang Patil: It can be tool for as well right information that I have to fetch here with whether it's a John it's date of birth or his nearby so…
The Admin: What is the question?
Pandurang Patil: what I'm trying to point out like it what that information can be a retrieved by making a when I say tool call it is not memory I'm referring to so memory …
The Admin: This is done by a tool called any tool call is tool call.
Pandurang Patil: it is one and the same thing with what you pointed okay
The Admin: This is a tool call right now. It can be outside MCP.
The Admin: And when do you understand this? Do not ask me futuristic question. It can be an LLM. It can be other. I will not answer those question because this is session six. Okay. Girish.
Girish Rao: That initial query is quite complex, So who Is it broken down before checking memory or is it just sent directly?
The Admin: Right now it's not broken down right now just send as a simple string. I look at the words from there. Do a reject simple. How do you do file search on Windows? And I get all the strings that match that.
Girish Rao: Cool. Thanks,
The Admin: Okay, any other question on this? Okay, this memory is rudimentary. That's why we have something like six sessions just from the memory because that is how we improve the agent. But right now this got a dump of maybe 100 lines from 40 million lines of data I may have had because I would have had+ code Still better. Okay, whatever I get back is called heads. That is what the memory provides. observe is a quadantic class in which I am adding the observations and sending it to perception. I have the actual query which is described here. I have the hits which is provided by the memory. I have the history which is nothing right now because history here means the agentic loop history where the loop has just started. So we are on there are no prior goals because we are still on a step number one and that goes to the perception. The perception has its own big prompt that you Perception prompt would be that you will be given this query hits history and prior goals and based on that you need to take the task and divide into multiple goals.
The Admin: Your output must be a set of goals and I showed you in the pyic class below. your goals must be a list of goals that are required in a particular format. So perception is going to come out with number two, goal number three and goal number four. Now it will also be sent a list of artifact if any old artifact is there. But right now nothing has happened. Right? That's why this line is above this particular ct is artifact. Now that goes back to the agentic loop. What has happened till now in the agentic loop query came in whatever memory was required to be attached that was taken along with the system prompt and query and history and prior goals we have dumped into Perception has given back list of goals and their status right now. Are we clear? Any question till now?
The Admin: Agentic loop is going to look at the goal number one and it is going to make it a part of the next step where the goal with the hits with the attachment with the history if and the tool if any is going to be sent to the decision. decision is going to just look at the goal number one hits that are to be part of it attachments that are required to be part of it which perception should say but perception didn't see any attachment till artifacts till now any history that is required to be looked at again perception you should decide that there tools are going to be part of the system prompt right tools are going to be the prompt MCP tool list that is being sent history you need to decide as an architect whether you're going to send the whole history or you want perception to decide some part of the history to be
02:40:00
The Admin: This is the overall architecture that can be made. So don't just assume what is written is something that you have to do. You have to think attachments. I can only send attachment if perception said there's an attachment. But right now there is no attachment for the goal number one. It goes to decision. decision has a prompt that you are a decision maker. You're going to be told a goal. Some history may come in if you're sending and you're going to be given a list of tools. All your job is to give me the final answer. Yes, I'm done. or you need to give me the name of the tool that I need to call. this information then again goes back to the agentic loop. Are we clear on Any question till now final answer…
Atul Dumrewal: Does I'm done mean what will it respond on the basis of perception of not yet no okay…
The Admin: what did you do in the final session?
The Admin: Did you do the assignment five and then I can't explain is a answer. Do you have a final answer? Basically perception was making call decision here has two objectives either say that yes based on things this is my final answer for example…
Atul Dumrewal: 
Atul Dumrewal: but perception was making that call I'm giving you an answer.
The Admin: what is fourth 44 + 44 are you doing a tool call or you giving final answer then it's not a tool call. So decision can do two things. final answer is you can say temporary answer if you're happy with that or temporary permanent answer.
Atul Dumrewal: Okay. Yes.
The Admin: Pratish not created yet so we'll not talk about it…
pratyush kumar: Johan, here attachment is the artifacts only, right? Okay,…
The Admin: but yes. Okay.
pratyush kumar: got it.
The Admin: Akash A spawns from the first code.
Akshay M: So the response from the decision component is with respect to the first code right the decision component the answer it is with respect to the first code which is created by okay and you will explain what happens the rest of three
The Admin: British many.
Mani R: Rowan involving the LLM and…
Mani R: system prompt it's our call right basically whoever that writing the loop is it's our call whether we are involving before memory even…
The Admin: Correct.
Mani R: if you want to break down the query it's all our own intention
The Admin: So, I'm
Soham Harshe: Here system mpt is the prompt for the perception is it?
Soham Harshe: Can we say that? Okay.
The Admin: Perception has a system prompt and…
The Admin: decision has a system All right. agent loop sees that I have a tool call it is going to call that particular tool. Decision told it that this tool call should be made. Now our loop is call the tool. tool is going to return back either some number 45 64 or a paragraph my name is Rohan and I was born here and blah blah blah blah and if this thing is more than 4 kilobyte it will automatically become an artifact so either I'm getting some text back or I'm getting a descriptor 1 1 2 3 4 tool ID or my code ID or
The Admin: thing and the artifact ID. Are we clear here? Any question here? Who creates the artifact? It's only action that can create artfact. here we have another LM that sits completely up to you. You can decide not to make Which looks at whatever has happened and based on that it puts inside the memory that this thing happened. It can be a preference. It can be some details that I like to share and everything that again depends on the memory that I created it completely up to you want to create or not. And this is how I keep updating my memory about preferences. I will not like to dump the whole 40 loop memory to the agent and say no pick the interesting facts from this. Are we clear? Okay.
sandeep hegde: This is not a session memory, right? This is actual persist.
The Admin: This is a persistent memory.
sandeep hegde: Got it.
The Admin: right. Differences facts…
Naman Bhardwaj: Can you please repeat did you say what will you put in memory again in this case you have mentioned record outcome tool called result artifact ID this is what you're putting in memory
02:45:00
The Admin: if you want. Yes, my tool failed. This artifact was created. Submit.
Swapnil Gusani: So if I tell this agent that I have this particular …
The Admin: If you tell this agent,…
The Admin: yes, no,…
Swapnil Gusani: if I have this particular preference perception is going to see it but it can decide right that is it possible that without calling any decision this can be saved in memory. so is the decision going to say whether this is supposed to be saving memory.
The Admin: no. Here I made another goal was to go online and…
Swapnil Gusani: So what is the goal and decision going to in that u I said that I want to use UV right so you don't need to go on internet and…
The Admin: search internet and that's what decision did I want to use UV decision will use UV…
Swapnil Gusani: search about UV for that it's at the end over here.
The Admin: where is a prompt to stay with the memory
The Admin: Yes, if you make it a part of the prompt or…
Swapnil Gusani: Okay.
The Admin: decision and decision will save in the memory…
Swapnil Gusani: The decision can also do that.
The Admin: then perception can also do that when you make architectures you need to make sure that you have a pure separation of concerns.
The Admin: What is job of decision? If you mix it, fair enough. You're completely okay to mix it. Clear. Okay.
Swapnil Gusani: Okay, run it.
Ankit Biswas: So again yeah now it's more clear So when the tool finds out if the information is more than 4 KB it creates the artifact ID or…
Ankit Biswas: it just stores the text information then it goes back to The agent again calls the perception right and…
The Admin: We have not gone there.
Ankit Biswas: then it validates whether the goals are done.
The Admin: No, we on step one there.
Ankit Biswas: Okay.
The Admin: Yes. Action.
Ankit Biswas: So, basically the artifact ID is created or the text memory is created based on 4 KB or not by the action…
The Admin: What do you mean by stored?
Ankit Biswas: but it hasn't been stored yet, right? It has just been created.
The Admin: Moment it is RAM,…
Ankit Biswas: I mean yeah a local file exactly not created.
The Admin: The ID in the Stored means a Local file is not created.
Ankit Biswas: Okay.
The Admin: N we may not do for artifact.
Ankit Biswas: We will do that. No, but the…
The Admin: As an architect need to decide you need to do it or I will not store artifacts locally. That would mean that 100%
Ankit Biswas: if you are not storing the artifact ID let's say if you have the text information okay you may not need that also we get to decide it what we want to store and…
The Admin: Correct.
Ankit Biswas: that happens where again at perception when the goal is being validated Okay,…
The Admin: No, that happens at architectural level. You need to decide.
Ankit Biswas: I get result. Okay.
The Admin: Okay. Yes,…
Naman Bhardwaj: Yeah. Question only on the memory part. What I'm saving in the memory? You mentioned I can save anything. For instance, I just want to call out let's say within this specific use case. Let's say tool called an artifact ID and result can be maybe some more occurring words or maybe things like that. Whatever my use case is, I can decide it accordingly.
The Admin: Your prompt can guide the LM to save accordingly.
Naman Bhardwaj: Thank you.
Naman Bhardwaj: No, my prompt can guide because this is by the MCP, right? I think this is what loop is going.
The Admin: No, no.
The Admin: I just said LLM only LM can write.
Naman Bhardwaj: Llm is writing in memory.
The Admin: Has to call a tool to Who decides to write?
Naman Bhardwaj: So you're saying LLM will only decide?
The Admin: LM can decide to write.
Naman Bhardwaj: No, I was under impression that once a tool is called artificate save now my agentic loop that means I am deciding…
Naman Bhardwaj: What do you think? Okay. Llm will decide.
The Admin: You have said two wrong things.
The Admin: Artifact is saved.
Naman Bhardwaj: Okay. My bad.
The Admin: Artifact is not saved. Whenever you using the word saved, that means it's saved permanently to a fixed location.
Naman Bhardwaj: Yeah. Sorry.
The Admin: So, artifact is in a temporary memory. can be recovered through the RAM call. Some string is there,…
The Admin: address is there. Second, agentic loop is not LM.
Naman Bhardwaj: Correct.
The Admin: Agentic loop is a fixed loop that you run. If you decide to save, my question is let us say I like chicken butter masala. Now in the memory I have facts, I have preferences. this is a preference.
02:50:00
Naman Bhardwaj: This is a preference maybe.
The Admin: Who decides that? How will the loop decide it?
The Admin: Memory is semantic in nature. That means an LLM has to be involved to decide what memory is it. Do you get why I'm saying memory the LM is required here?
Naman Bhardwaj: Okay. Yes.
Naman Bhardwaj: Or can't I made it like this? Just in case might be wrong 100% that not point being I can decide it myself.
The Admin: Yes, you're right. that one of the use case of audio is to kill a person. You can use reax. Yes.
Naman Bhardwaj: I might not leave it to maybe for a given specific use case because in the sense it is architecture only right I'm saying that this will be a memory go to the memory if you find anything new set this is preferences and…
Naman Bhardwaj: facts and things like that so that is sorted but in any case if I want to have a different memory only for saving this and I don't want to call an this okay in this case it is LLM thank
The Admin: You can dump it.
The Admin: Then You can make it a call and dump it. Yes, correct.
praveen v: So when I say agentic loop, it is my own plain program, Python program. So where I am,…
praveen v: correcting all these five components…
The Admin: Correct.
praveen v: where only the system prompts are living with perception and decision. That's all. Perfect. Thank you.
The Admin: Okay. Yes.
Swapnil Gusani: So the action we either return a descriptor or an artifact based on the size right now. so is the artifact also just like the descriptor temporary in nature.
The Admin: Everything is temporary nature…
Swapnil Gusani: So okay so there could be cases…
The Admin: unless your architecture forces it to be not.
Swapnil Gusani: where you want to actually save architect to revisit it again and again. Okay.
The Admin: If you want to follow for example GDPR rules then you need to save the artifacts. you need to have another LLM as described here…
Deepak T S: So what goes into the memory in terms of preference and facts? should it be given to the decision which as the LLM to identify what goes into memory?
The Admin: which looks at what happened in the last loop and then decide what goes inside the memory. Another L another agent
Deepak T S: Yeah. Yes. I got it. But do you think that the place is in the decision and…
Deepak T S: not as a standalone arbitrary l Yes, thank
The Admin: I need to here…
The Admin: because our decision could have done something it failed. What tool was called? I need to save the tool definition. I need to save the tool was failing 45 times. I need to see this tool is better than the other. After the decision got something, some information came in. I want to save that information. So, it needs to be at the end of each iteration according to me. But You're also an architect. you can decide where it comes. This is where we create one episode memory. So after the episodic memory is there, we extract in the memory that we need to save and then we store it. That's why it's called episodic memory also. our first loop is done. comes what happens? Agent loop sees all the task all the goals are done. No second goal is pending.
The Admin: So it again sends whatever information is there this part observe query hits history what is the history this full thing that happened in the last step that is dumped here and prior goals this thing dumped here right this was mark done this needs to be marked done by perception not agentic loop that goes inside now when it goes inside what did perception perception will see I was given these 100 hits in that history The prior goal was null. I created these four goals. The first goal was sent to the Decision called this particular tool. That tool did something like this and this is coming back with me. How does it update this? It's going to say the first job is done. So perception is going to say the first job is done. second job needs to be done. what will happen? For second job it will create the goal The goal now goes to the decision.
The Admin: So that's the information which is created here. If in the last step artifact was created for example go to a URL and fest the content and decision f content the content is now with the action action made did artifact and it's now part of the agent loop that goes to perception only perception going to say to decision this is your task and dumping the ID. Agent six loop is going to dump the ID. any other question one second we're calling it a agentic loop in the loop while goals equal to greater than zero
02:55:00
Poornima T A: So programmatically speaking perception has given all these four goals agent is not going to know that it has given four goals in the sense that this is a piece of text response that the LLM has given.
The Admin: So that's the right.
Poornima T A: So literally speaking, you're giving a query hit and all that to an M imperception. LLM is going to give that response you're saying will have a list of goals…
The Admin: Correct.
Poornima T A: which agent is going to iterate through. Because I had it in my mind that previously we were doing this. It responds with a tool or it responds that this is the answer. So, I thought probably we're going in a loop until something like this happens. Okay.
Pandurang Patil: So this goals or the task list is perception is storing somewhere or we need to store that the checklist the list of items are done or…
Pandurang Patil: it is the job done by the agent itself or it's a part of perception Right.
The Admin: Below I have explained a goal list in pyntic you remember that.
The Admin: So as architect you create that then you assign a task to perception to maintain the list. So when you give it to perception is going to give output in that pyantic…
Pandurang Patil: Okay.
The Admin: but maintenance of that goal list is with perception but you as an architect have to provide all the scaffolding.
The Admin: This is how this is the parentic class in which you will tain and so Maintain the goal list is part of the perception. Yes. And going through the goal list and containing the loop is the part of the agent. So zero
Pandurang Patil: But that should be part of the perception as hear it. Yeah.
Swapnil Gusani: So here in prior goals what you will get you get just one previous goal or many we are in the second episode right okay and…
The Admin: Yeah, in the second episode we're going to get this full list.
Swapnil Gusani: then in that one of the goals has done perception can say it's done okay so Even…
The Admin: No, I just explained only perception can say it's done.
Swapnil Gusani: though third goals have not been attempted still this entire list is going to come to perception.
The Admin: Of course, because not supposed to create a new list,…
Swapnil Gusani: Would there be an agent which can complete all the goals and rank all perception but only the perception can decide.
The Admin: not in session six. Rahul
Rahul Kumar: Hi Ron. so just I'll tell my understanding. So once these artifacts are given to the agent loop and…
Rahul Kumar: the agent loop gives to the decision, right? Sorry gives to the perception.
The Admin: That is true for everything.
The Admin: No. Right from the history,…
Rahul Kumar: Okay.
The Admin: From the gold. That is true for everything.
Rahul Kumar: Okay. So any communication between the components will happen via the agent loop only.
The Admin: 100%. Correct.
Rahul Kumar: 
Rahul Kumar: Second question is that the perception can have their own LLM. Let's say it is having the GPT 3.5 turbo. And then the decision is having the Grock. Okay. Take got thank you.
The Admin: Deep not in session six.
Deepak T S: So the list of goals could change in the intermediate. Okay.
The Admin: Not in session six. In future we may want to change it. Maybe there's a goal update and something that can happen that needs slightly. when you're increasing slight complexity please move out from session six. We're keeping things very simple and even with this simple architecture the four prompts going to share you're going to see that it struggles based on the history.
Akshay M: The perception law is going to mark the first goal as done based on looking at history right
The Admin: Yes. Okay.
The Admin: Thank you.
Ankit Biswas: So once okay after the tool call this memory artifact what is agent goes to ception. So in perception do we have two separate I mean it has the LLM this layer or this block.
Ankit Biswas: So one prompt will be for creating the goals another prompt will be for validating based on the memory.
The Admin: Same prompt has to explain. Correct.
03:00:00
Ankit Biswas: Same prompt has to do it based on the history and the artifact attachment it has to understand. Okay. Okay.
pratyush kumar: Rohan one question here. So the list of goals what we have 1 2 3 4. So for one goal this complete cycle is it like there's a possibility of run twice for one goal or…
pratyush kumar: one cycle will be enough for one goal.
The Admin: There's a possibility of that is possible.
pratyush kumar: There's a possibility that this complete cycle what we are repeating for 1 2 3 four goal and one goal is not completed. So second iteration for the same goal is it something like that is there available.
The Admin: Not in session six. You're saying you're so look at the prompt that you are sending to the perception that there's a task that will be provided to you. You need to divide a task into different goals. if you're in loop then you'll be actually provided with the last set of goals. You need to see whether the Goal was not completed. You are allowed to create new set of goals and then spawn new agents. Prompt goes back to the prompt that you have.
pratyush kumar: Got it wrong. Thank you.
The Admin: Okay. Yeah.
Sanjana Parida: prior goals first time it's zero like nothing but second time four goals has been decided so second iteration it will send all the four goals so is that the idea of sending all the four goals is for the perception to decide based on the outcome of the first goal do I need to enhance these goals or…
Sanjana Parida: do I need to remove and add some more goals or something is that the concept
The Admin: That's right.
The Admin: Yeah, that's So, look at this itation number one u number of goals and whether done or not. So two number of goals done or 3 four goals done or No idea. Perception is going to fill this up. And in the step number three which Nothing was on ute inexecution also. So it will be sent goal done executed.
The Admin: Perception needs to mark this that this was done executed already came and now this is being executed right. So executed or not we're going to send goal list is maintained by perception done…
The Admin: not perception needs to decide which it will tell in the step number three. So your prompt will decide whether perception has a right to change this or…
Sanjana Parida: Got it.
Sanjana Parida: And you Go ahead.
The Admin: not. moment you decide the perception can change you need to change the architecture of the agent also because now you're telling agentic loop that it is possible that the perception might change the goal list in that case what do we do with the old moment you talk about it what if the step number 1 2 3 4 five are there three is done fourth failed but fourth failed because of the step number two all the complexity will start coming in so right now we are saying one to step number 1 2 3 4 one fail the task
The Admin: has failed. More complex is the situation where you are trying me to take
Sanjana Parida: Got it.
Sanjana Parida: And Rohan throughout this discussion you have been telling you are the architect you decide but as novice in this area we may not have the right intent of building something So is there any and you mentioned this cloud code and all those things also is in this framework. Do we have a comparative analysis so that we can see okay this is our architecture that we built and…
Sanjana Parida: this is what is supposed to be built or this is how it has to be built okay and…
The Admin: some pointers at the end of the session.
The Admin: We still have 14 sessions more and if the final architecture was done then cloud code 11 team will also been out there. So it's a continuously evolving thing. People have not figured it out yet.
Sanjana Parida: 
Sanjana Parida: if we are going in the right direction of building our perception or building our decisions properly. So how we will know if we do not know what is the best in the world right now. Yeah,
The Admin: I have so that's why assignments are very important. If you're able to solve these four then you understood where you need to be right now. Assignment takes a lot of time to create. It might look very simple but takes extremely long.
The Admin: So these four specific prompts that I have given are designed in such a way that if your architect is wrong, you will not be able to solve the four assignments.
Swapnil Gusani: Can make changes to
The Admin: Of course, no. And believe me, it is only a step-by-step approach. Even for example, if you have a cloud code, right? you have a cloud code, you have a cloud also. You can ask cloud to go look at a cloud code and give you the architecture. You'll not understand anything. You have to go through this pain to understand why a specific thing is required because on you make your own architecture some of this will need a very big or better LM compared to other. So you need to have full understanding of what is happening and on top of that codex architecture cloud code lang is not same as crew.ai all the architecture are different what we are learning is the best of all so it needs to evolve slowly depend on
03:05:00
Pandurang Patil: So the perception in the second iteration would be fed with the decisions output which has been saved in the history and…
The Admin: Yes. Correct. Okay.
Pandurang Patil: because that history is now populated with the data. perception has a information which is going to be used by perception to decide that the first goal is done and then it will mark that and it will ask go for the task or go for the next items based on how your system. Okay.
Ankit Biswas: So amongst all this what the action is sending it back in terms of artifact or relevant messages to the agent and then to the perception we are still maintaining the conversation history as well right that is also getting and…
The Admin: Yes, of course.
Ankit Biswas: 
Ankit Biswas: my question here Is will that not also inflate up as we talk more and more in one session the conversation is that…
The Admin: That is why perception needs to be with Gemini and that is why artifact creation is required. Anything becomes more larger, we just remove it.
Ankit Biswas: why when I also have a talk with co-pilot or…
Ankit Biswas: plot while building anything after a while it says compacting the messages because okay yeah…
The Admin: action. Okay.
Ankit Biswas: but we are not doing that compacting thing here yet.
The Admin: Yeah, because we're in session.
Ankit Biswas: We will probably do that later.
The Admin: So now it's going to mark one and done. It's going to see the action. So you said it's going to see the decision output and mark it. No, it is going to see the decision output of course. But we're going to see the action.
The Admin: It's going to see the action output and mark it done or not. If it is done, then it's going to issue the second one, right? even how does it issue? It's going to say this is the prompt do this and this is the attachment ID that is there. this information is again going to look at the let me clear this Arrows always go from agent loop to these guys. None of these guys are talking to each other. Just look at the arrow. Goes to memory Goes to perception comes back again. Agent loop. If artifact is involved, goes to artifact, comes back again, agent loop, goes to decision, comes back again, agent loop, goes to art, goes to action, comes back, right? It is always and always you're going to see that agent loop is triggering all of this. And a trigger for that is a packet of information. Here we have a pyic class. Here we we have a pyic class. Here we have a pattern. Everywhere we have a parentic class, it comes back.
The Admin: The next object that the agent loop is going to see it's going to see goal number 0 1 2 3 4 for example or let's forget zero this is done or not executed or not right that's all it sees and what is the packet is created by what perception you can always see that when it creates a step with the goal hits where is it creating sorry perception back let me remove it creates the goal has
The Admin: attachments right so the list it is maintaining is goal number done or not and the attachment ID so goal number one done attachment ID yes something is required sorry nothing here goal number two not done attachment ID goal number three no idea no idea goal number four no idea no idea this is what goes back to the agent loop what is the task of agent loop's task is to see what is the next goal to be done whenever it is goal it automatically going to go to our decision. So now it is going to go to the decision here and it will go back with this ID which our perception has added. It is just going to dump the whole text to the decision. decision has a prompt. you are a decision maker. you have these NCB tools that you can call but when you're calling you need to look at some attachments that may also be there ment. it attachment looks at a text that is there.
The Admin: is going to say based on information this was the requirement the birth date is a specific date or John's address is this or John's the three I need to start I need to find the restaurants next to John's address so I'm going to issue a tool call on Zumato best restaurants near JC let's say JPEG right that tool is called now that tool goes here right the information comes back here tool information is what that we have macros we have let's
03:10:00
The Admin: CCD I'm just picking some Raj Dhani and other restaurant names are there that is coming here that again now goes to perception perception we will told task one done task two it is going to say it is done it had the attachment ID now task three it is going to say create a prompt for that this is what decision should do and these are the four restaurants that are close to decision I want you to basically look at the availability of table on 7th of March right that is what is going here there's no attachment required here because all the information
The Admin: was very simple four five things seven eight things but if the attachment was list of thousand restaurants that are there it will go back as a different prompt the prompt will be that here is the attachment to you look through that find the best restaurants from there and give me that information it will still not be able to hop in because the prompt is again automatic it says describe your goal for a decision that it can do only in one step if you say that here's a list of restaurants find the restaurant which are closer to this address and then book again becomes two step the next would be look at the attachment and give me the list of four five only. It gets a four five and then it again spawns the next action where it says that book the book the reservation on 7th of May on this particular one.
The Admin: So you see that three four things that happened but everything what happens happens with that atomic patch that is there right this is the class this is again the class this is again a class this is again a class sorry this arrow goes here one arrow here and one arrow here okay any question on this now before you start asking questions I just want you to look at the rest of the session also Yeah, we looked at memory. we discussed four kind of memories. Then the three read method are covered in the class. we have memory reads which is going to query history kind none top.
The Admin: You're only passing on top eight eight results. Your architect you decide 881 memory filter we are filtering by a kind of goal. This is something that again is both of these actions are not using any LLM calls. You can just filter based on something and read based on something. Then relevancy there are three function that are involved. You can decide which one to use. That is what I built on my end. Yes, the relevancy is where the len can be involved. what you're seeing right now there are three ways of reading the memory just read filter or relevance relevance will require an LM not built in session six okay who writes as I said writing to the memory is not easy somebody needs some we need an LM to read what happened and then write right for example my favorite color is red if I just say that a perception is not going to write decision doesn't have MCB tool to write if you ask decision to write it that means one more tool has to be exposed so what I've done in
The Admin: I architectures it will look at the loop one conversation figure out is it something that can be saved as let's say a fact or a preference and save there so at the end of each loop memory is memory element is called and that saves it so this is where the lm is required because this is something which is semantic in nature what are my preferences what are fact where I need to store and this is where we actually store it we dispatch an MCV call we get a result it was saved we move to the next one now the symmetry
The Admin: matters here the LM call at right times and what make the future eats cheap right if you don't do it here then the memory that you're going to be writing is also very complex yeah I think I was with my friend when we went to Alaska and then I remember that there he mentioned that his birthday is 7th of May if you do not use LLM they're going to save that fact as the memory but we need a very simple memory my friend John's birthday is 7th of May right all that can only be done by LLM that's where we need the structure structure where now we have entity John attribute birthday value something like this so memory becomes a very very simple format and again part part of a prompt where memory can extract this and save it like this otherwise it's very difficult to find also right if I save my memory like entity John attribute birthday value then what is the birthday of when is John's birthday becomes very simple I can say when goes to entity and what goes to birthday and I have the answer and I can publish it but again there also we need some lm to decide
The Admin: Okay, persistence. Now I've kept it very simple. Whatever memory is creating, we just create that in the son Very simple. Just dump it there and next time I can just read it. As we progress along, we'll have vector databases, rags and all the other stuff that you keep hearing. But right now in session six, very simple. Now this is a honest implementation detail that I want to share with you because we have simplified the memory a lot and you also have a lot of question memory. We need a very well-designed LLM around this. That's why rag itself is a field here. Rag experts the people who have just created their career on rag and what is pip friends what is fact all of that.
03:15:00
The Admin: There's a vector database then there are graph databases also there's a graph knowledge base you'll hear a lot of words around this precisely for that from session 7 8 onwards we'll start working on that now scratchpad is a separate kind of small fiction I just wanted to introduce as a concept where the memory decides that maybe I think is important for the current loop let me save it right some additional information or fact that you may want it to be there it can be never read or it can be a perception may find it useful and include it also this is something interesting
The Admin: thing that you may add ask your memory agent to keep writing scratch pad what happened in current loop would like to summarize it it's super useful especially when we're going out of context because then I can just use a scratch pad for the 40 loops and then combine it and get that as a context moment my context is over right so I just want to introduce as a concept and memory in session 6 has no consolidation loop the real production agent is going to run in the background and will keep on looking at the stuff and keep on consolidating it right now it is part of agentic loop for us to keep things simple.
The Admin: Ultimately when you also see a clot going out of context it runs a fill service goes through everything and then consolidates and then saves it right because let's say my friend's name was Sith Ram but I call him Sitha so I'll say Sitha was going out on a date and then he decided to marry Pankage and then suddenly we start talking about Raman and then we are talking about If you see the episodic memory that is there, you'll say sitha married pankage and then sitha was married to Ram and then you'll create a big massacre in Bangalore right so we don't want that so that will happen if you have these kind of episodic memories but if you consolidate everything then you say sitharam's small name is sitha and then he was married to pankage why panka maybe right and then this sitha is different so that happens when we have a full consolidation and you're not storing based on a memory
The Admin: Okay, artifacts. We have already discussed this, but the idea here is that typical web page fetches something like 100 KB, right? So, I've kept 4 KB. 4K is already a big number, but 100 KB is massive. So, whenever that comes in, we store an artifact and then we pass it on. So, 4 KB is what I've kept very simple get bytes, get data exists or not. We just check these four things. So, class is very simple and checking whether bite is there or not is very simple. And if I have the artifact ID, I basically go inside the get bytes and get those bytes and drop it. Right? Even the artifact doesn't know what is there. It just knows that we have a super useful because you can now store images as Artifacts are literally bytes stored internally. So when you're dumping it, you can dump it as artifact in Gemini properly. It has a place where you can dump images literally as set of strings or B64. when you do that it will just read the image also. Okay.
The Admin: So memory holds the handle of the string right artifact number ABC or 1 2 3 4 as I mentioned perception handle the memory in the memory hits never the bytes it's never going to read the artifact decision sees the bite only when perception decide that it has to read an action produces the bite right so this is how the artifact is managed internally in the whole loop perception the orchestrator we already explained so had you let me go through all of this then all the question that you asked were part of it but No, explain on the graph only. Okay, so perception throws Observe will have a query. It will have a hit. It'll have a history. It will fire and run an id. We have seen that. Now I can rush. So now it has four obligations and these obligations are saved to make sure that you can make your prompt better. If the prior goal list is empty, decompose the query into one or more bounded goals. a short imperative statement. For each prior examine the run history.
The Admin: Mark the goal done true the moment the history contains an action that satisfies it. Once done, the goal remains done in every sequential iteration. For the first unfinished goal in the list, decide whether it needs a raw bite from the previously referenced artifact. If yes, set the goals ach artifact_ ID to one of the artifact handled in the memory hips. Preserve the goal order. Do not insert in the middle. Do not drop a goal. this is where some of you had a question. What if the last goal was wrong and lah blah blah? This is session six. We are keeping things simple. If unfortunately we we fail. It's like you ask me a question. What if I fail in 10th? Can I still go and give J? No. The only part to give J or CAT or GMAT or blah blah is to clear the 10th class.
The Admin: So we have to unfortunately start again. That is the current goal. But in the modern world, we can just learn AI and say that I hate college and it's become a billion error. Okay, this is where I'm mentioning that artifact index was a better thing and not the string. So you can please read that decision as a very simple stuff. Decision would mean that you're given a goal. You have a h from the memory item list. Here's the attachment given to you as a bite. So you can directly read history list if there's something that need to look at and MCP tools a list of that that really becomes the part of the system prompt that you're giving to your decision.
03:20:00
The Admin: So system prompt and next step very simple for decision that's why decision can be literally a small LM that is a part of the LLM gateway v3 action pure dispatch action is just told that you're given this tool and you are given this string basically what to do or arguments so tool arguments go so very simple and what it returns is just literally the string that is back. Now in the MCP server six I have written six one one is called web search the other is called fetch URL then we have create file update file and edit list now is the time to actually show you some code not code but the results of the code because this session is about you writing the code but I can show you some code
The Admin: So code 6 we're going to be looking at first of all gateway v3. So here read me that already uploaded is running at 8101 which is this one. So now if you see there are two ones we have a worker pool followers decided asama gemini nvidia grog cerebras open router and github but we have a router pool also. So cerebras, grog, nvidia and github all of them can decide among themselves which the decision needs to be called by which of these elements. So that is now inbuilt already. What I wanted to show you was the MCP server. So that code that is already shared also. You can see my structure. I have action I have agent 6 artifacts decisions gateway MCP server memory perception pyon project requirement.txt.
The Admin: unfortunately because it was earlier not using UV then schemas and rest MCP I will directly go to in MCP server you're going to see that I'm using something called Tavi DG go there are two search engines that are being used here because sometimes one fail and the other is available and once the URL is there I'm using crawl 4.ai AI. let's go to travel first. So it gives you around 1,000 API credits every month. Every month you can only do thousand. search is expensive. People don't give it free. So the way I have written my MCP server is every time I call Tavi or DGO, I'm saving in the JSON how many times have I called it. So I know that I need to use something else.
The Admin: or why my agent is failing. So that is inbuilt in my MCB server. Second thing then we looked at crawl for AI. So let's go crawl for AI is one of the best libraries to look at the URL output and convert that into a really good markdown. I'm using markdown format. So this is what I'm using and it uses this internally. Now if I look at control A MCP tools.
The Admin: So web search is there I may use tab or something else. Then fetch URL here internally it uses crawl for AI. So the output is always really good right? We are not looking at all if you really want to know how websites look like I have to disable u JavaScript to visit this website. Don't believe me?
The Admin: add this is how types of India looks like. So I have to disable JavaScript. I've specifically disabled JavaScript for types of India so I can at least read something. That's why I don't get any images and all but even after that it's this complicated. If you were to ask, you're thinking maybe this is landing page. Okay, let's go inside here. Also, if you ask the HTML dump, you can see how much information just keeps coming in. So, you have to remove all of that and crawl for AI does that very well. So, MCP server.py is saved here. When you click it will download it. Then you have gateway also shared with you. So, when you click that will also download.
03:25:00
The Admin: MCB server will need a ENV file which you have already and there you need to add a tely API that is how you're going to get your thousand searches otherwise you may just get run out of your duck go service very fast you must install DDGS which is duck go service you need to install crawl for AI as I mentioned and then you need to install tab all of them are simple you can just redirect your clot to do it for you the agent loop is sort of shared with you so as dev
The Admin: Here we have the run ID just to maintain some internal file or internal id of which run are we running memory remember we have a user query we just dump it the memory ncp session we load all the tools now here we are specifying max iteration maybe I just want to run 10 times depending on what's the budget or what's a test I have because if you don't set this maybe it will run 100 times we don't want that hits memory read query history right so we've dumped the history we run the query.
The Admin: history is literally a file for us right the loop for us and we add the query we done the history and from there we're getting a hits along with the query along with the history along with the prior goal along with the n ID go to perception it observes what do I do what is the output of the perception observation observation has goals left becomes a prior goals if observation all done then we break out.
The Admin: So observation here has to be a class that you have to write of course. observation This is next goal that is not done. Then do we have any attachments or not? goal dot attach artifact and exist. Then attach this one. I append artifact that There may be one two three four artifact are required. Literally if you fix this particular agent loop then you sort of are done. What is the Decision do next step is the Out answer is what? It's a kind answer answer or it's a kind u tool call based on that I can decide right if it is just answer then history.append
The Admin: and done otherwise I'm going to be calling action execute what out tool call this is a very simple class that needed to come up we can actually give it to cloud code and say write the for decision write the class for action now memory to record outcome here we have a tool call we have a result ID artifact ID we have the run ID and we have the goal ID now here I'm not calling any lm I'm just appending everything right and history append this is So what is History is history ID. The kind was action or it was decision or was a perception. Then we have the Then we have tool which was called the argument which was sent and tool descriptor which was there and artifact ID. All that basically goes back to history. Remember you're here for loop. So Each iteration goes to the The very first thing you notice in the loop that starts with a memory as I told you.
The Admin: Second, the loop reads the memory at the top of every iteration. Then third, perception is given the prior goal if they exist or not otherwise it needs to maintain and fill it. Fourth, the attachment artifact is little an ID that is maintained. Only the decision is dumped with if you see we have a decision attached, right? And that needs to be inside a decision loop or decision class where attach is likely thrown as the prompt. And the fifth one decision returns an answer or it's going to return tool call. So the answer depends on answer event in the history and continue So if the answer If the answer is final answer then we give it a perception it may shut down. your gateway is now going to run at 8101. This is what is happening. So Agent loop 6 has memory perception decision and action.
The Admin: I'm maintaining memory using Gemini because I think extracting facts and other stuff is complicated. So the provider I can assign there is G. So you can force a provider also. I can decide not to use a Router is only used for decision. Right? So the prompt actually first goes to the router in the gateway decides that looks like easy call. I'll just send it to GMA or look complicated. I'll send to Gemini. So it handles all of that directly automatically. Perception always goes to Gemini, it can decide to use flashlight, use a rout outer pool and use a tiny pool called pool has name tiny, large and medium. Okay. things that I have figured out reasoning applied false because for the free LM provider provides a reasoning. So whenever you're providing reasoning is fake. Then if you say cache input zero or you trying to enable cash input again not provided by any free LM. So that is also useless for us.
03:30:00
The Admin: And if you add a temperature it is going to destroy the LM output. So do not apply any tempature. Again for free LMS it's not Always use temperature one if you are using This one line I wanted to read out. So a common decision in agent system that you need to take is whether you're going to be using a single LM agent or you're going to be using a multi- aent system where you have handling multiple system prompts.
The Admin: Most of the advanced LM that are there claude opus 4.7 and Gemini they have a long context history they can maintain it and they should be able to work for long but the problem is the artifacts we just discussed that just browsing times of India will just fill the whole artifact and will cry 1 million doesn't mean times of India can't beat it times of India can really beat it so that's where we need other agents to also come in so frontier lm can handle everything in one but it is required that you have multiple ones.
The Admin: Also you also need to remember that right now when you're working with cloud you're working on one full application end to end right and that's a big huge context in between it is required that you have these artifacts that are handled by something else if your final application is literally tell me the temperature of Tokyo and find me best restaurants very simple one LM might be just good enough for you but if you're making it attached to an application like you're launching your own Gmail or own email client where you have a LM
The Admin: That always knows something like charge GPD and then you ask hey what is it that I told Rouhan last time now in that case you can't have a new LM spawning every time you need to have an LM that is maintaining the whole thing your loop will never end so scenarios where the loop will never end or the loop may run 400,000 times this architecture is required now most of the agents are going to be running in sandbox the smaller agents you open a small agent get a task done and delete it that's the model architecture that people follow. So from six onwards you're going to follow multi- aenting architecture. Right now unfortunately we have a sequential one goal two goal three. By the time we hit session 10 you're going to see that we can do two goal three simultaneously. And we can actually define the whole graph that goal 1 3 output of one and two will go to goal number four and goal number six will take the output of goal number four goal number five and goal number one. we can define all of that in the step one itself.
The Admin: So people on LinkedIn will keep on telling you that we have many architectures. You can decide to have a parallel architecture or you can decide to have a sequential architecture or a loop architecture or router architecture right to all of them you have to tell them when they are telling you they're basically saying this whenever you read such comments on the agentic architectures on LinkedIn this is how people are sitting. So in that case just don't believe them because there is no fixed architecture. Your agentic architecture needs to come up with architecture for a particular problem. The framing is misleading. Okay.
The Admin: This is now someone was asking Here's one good reference written by anthropic itself. And then here are some agentic recipes. When you go to recipes you'll see that there are many different kind of agencies are defined here and you can go look at them read about them and read about some other agentic architectures also. This is how NBS will define an architecture and say these are the six architecture in the world. Right? That is what this is. And then this is from Anthropic where they're talking about how do we create effective agents. This is 2024 I believe. So still 2 year old but a good read if you really want to know how agentic frameworks people think about. your assignment description itself is As I said there are four things that you have to solve. Here's a query one looks very simple. Fetch HTTP Wikipedia cloud challenge.
The Admin: You're not even required to go online and figure out what the URL is and tell me his birth dead date, and three key contributions to information theory. Unfortunately, you cannot do this without the architecture. You have to implement the architecture. You have to have perception. You have to have action. You have to have decision and you have to have the memory and then do this in a single call. You may be able to do this very easily. But this claw Shannon a web page is 250 kilobyte just a Wikipedia page. It's a big huge page and you'll see that your agent will struggle if you dump everything if you're not using the MCP tools that are provided. Shannon was a famous man and then you have all of this going inside your L&M. Try it. Let's see how good your agent 5 It's very simple Look at Wikipedia page and extract something. Give it to me. Right.
03:35:00
The Admin: So the output is going to look like this. Hit one fetch Wikipedia page. Extract date of birth and three key contributions. Tool is called URL. It is going to dump around 263 KV of information. fetch Wikipedia page for Cloud Shannon. Extract birth date and blah blah blah. Here's the artifact right now. Cloud Shannon answer is going to be coming like that. Now it three fresh Wikipedia page done. Extract birth date blah blah is done. All goals are done. Final answer. per date 30 disc this key contribution a mathematical theory of communication introduction to bit install and a channel limit first question right now second prompt find three familyfriendly things to do in Tokyo this weekend check Saturday's weather forecast there and tell me which one is most appropriate h the iteration should look like this open find three familyfriendly things to do in Tokyo goes to decision calls query familyfriendly things to do in Tokyo
The Admin: this weekend and then three results are recorded right then first is done it's now opens the second one which is check Saturday weather in Tokyo tool call fetch ww wtr in Tokyo format Saturday it needs to call that Saturday forecast is patch rain done the third action choose the most appropriate activity given the weather answer given Saturday's patchy rain forecast and indoor activity recommended from the three option found you Zuzuki outer market sushi class or Tokyo Sky Tree. The Zuzuki sushi class is most obvious because it's fully indoors and family oriented. All three tasks are done. Right. The third prompt, my mom's birthday is on 15th of May 2026. Remember that. And give me a calendar reminder for two weeks before and on the day. That is run one. You need to let the whole loop finish. Okay? Your perception should come back and say I've done it.
The Admin: In the run two we have to ask when is my mom's birthday. So first query goes in everything is done it should come back and tell you I'm done. Then you need to ask when is my mom's birthday. Very simple thing you can think us see. And then this is trace one. This is how your trace one should look like the first loop. And this is how the trace two should look like the second loop. And the third one the asynaya research. Search for python asaya best practices. the top three results and give me the short numbered list of the advice they agree on. Again, it will become iteration three and so on. So, I've done this. It's not that I've not done it and that's why I have ran it before starting the class. I'll run it again if you want.
The Admin: So, this is my first one. fetch this and tell me the birthday and blah blah blah. I'm zooming in for view also. Okay, it's already wrapped. fetch this particular URL and tell me the birth date blah blah blah. So, press enter to continue. I enter the run ID is Tell me the birthday processing request by the list tool Right? Then it goes to MCP2 loaded. These are nine tools that are Hit one. Fetch this. Extract clot shan birthday blah blah blah tool call fetch this particular URL processing request. The er goes in 3 crawl for AI comes in. Artifact is saved. 263 kilobyte is there. And then some serious information to understand whether tool is passed or not. Right. Text is there.
The Admin: then hits two the extract Claude Shannon birthday and three key contribution to information theory attachment is this that's all that goes going to the decision along with all the tool list and all it just reads that answers claw channel is all similarly we have the second one Tokyo search three family oriented restaurants processes it goes online find some results titled best things to do check the weather condition for
The Admin: the weather it is checking on Wikipedia on grow on Yahoo gets response from two pages titled November 30 weather in Tokyo detail weather on November 30 forecast gets a forecast it extracts that I'm not telling date that's why I'm assuming and third one is things to do on weekend and then from there it is sending a date also extracting information gets a six hits all three are done so it takes around six five iterations for this and this is the result it comes back with The fourth one, my mom's birthday. It goes first iteration. It had an error executing. so I create a file because I need to save it somewhere. So it done in the first one and the second one starts here. When is my mom's birthday? in that case it figure reads the file out and then comes back and tell me the information. And for the async io, it has a long search online. Let me run any one of them.
03:40:00
The Admin: For example, I'm going to run e of course simultaneously also happening. Cool down automatically. Which of them is process request call a tool. It's going online and figuring that out. It's searching also call Gemini perception would be called I think Search tool First is done. You can see it Done. Second one is working on this.
The Admin: Of course, you can paste everything that you want here. And simultaneously, I'm also maintaining us as I already told Yes. And the sandbox reminder file. So these are to create files basically. So it just creates them and full log if you want to see my code basically. So of course when I share the code with you, you will be able to replicate what I did but you confident right what is it that I'm doing I don't know what am I learning in this class everything cla does I just write a prompt and does everything assignment number six now do
Poornima T A: Rohan, can we complete all this in one week? It's scary.
The Admin: I finished it in 6 hour.
The Admin: And the reason that I will not evaluate I don't have to evaluate after the first week is because the code will be shared. So only for assignment six the deadline is one week you have to finish it because I like to share my code because that code will become the base for the session seven you will need to build on top of it right so that's why it's required to do it properly otherwise session seven will be very difficult okay money
Mani R: R how come it is multi- aent we are one loop we are connecting multiple right so you said basically we are writing we can orchestrate a certain plan and…
The Admin: What is an agent? First class. What is an agent?
Mani R: action thing and Yes.
The Admin: An agent is something that has its own specific prompt. can read and write a memory and can call a particular tool.
Mani R: Right. Yeah. Okay.
The Admin: So a perception can call a specific tool in the specific case and…
The Admin: then we have a decision also and decision can call multiple and then we have a memory also. So we have already three loop in
Rahul Kumar: Yeah, Ron, I'm having a couple of questions. So, based on the code you were sharing, I had seen the artifact I ID is with the memo.
The Admin: One second.
Rahul Kumar: Yeah. Yeah.
The Admin: The code I'm sharing sharing is showing.
Rahul Kumar: Sorry showing okay somewhere I had seen the memory item dot artifact_ ID.
The Admin: Okay.
Rahul Kumar: But in initially you had told that the artifact are not being stored anywhere. It will be temporary and will be thrown out.
The Admin: Here's my code. Tell me Where is the artifact? Where do I search for it? If it is stored, it should be a file, right? It is not stored locally.
Rahul Kumar: Okay.
The Admin: Memory of course it's going to be there. Me This is a RAM you're looking at. This is a RAM thing.
Rahul Kumar: 
Rahul Kumar: Okay. And the second question is that the assignment I did not understand what I'm supposed to do like the
The Admin: You're supposed to give these Prompt number four.
The Admin: Prompt number three and solve. Let's look at the assignment so you can understand directly. Assignment the code is given for MCP server and LM gateway 3. Build an agent that passes all the four target queries.
Rahul Kumar: My third question is for the prefab I was trying to do one project. Okay.
03:45:00
The Admin: So you have four queries. You need to send it to your agentic system that is following the RPMD architecture that we discussed today and you need to show that solve for all the queries. That's all. let's stick to this only I'll be here don't worry later…
Pandurang Patil: Yeah, I have a out of context question.
The Admin: then okay anyone regarding to…
Raghu Rammohan: Yeah, I'll last
The Admin: what we're covering right now
The Admin: I did not question.
Akshay M: Yeah. So the agents we build are they going to be specific one or are they going to be generalized? When the agents we are going to build or…
The Admin: Repeat again.
Akshay M: the one you're showing are they going to be very specific or they going to be generalized for in general?
The Admin: When are you saying for this assignment or what? That depends on…
Akshay M: in general in the real world.
The Admin: what you want to do, you want to make perplexity or you want to make plot code depends on you generally you'll have a very specific use case to solve right that's still architecture is fixed okay anybody
Akshay M: Okay. Yeah. But So I found it difficult to imagine how I would save the memory, write the history but that's where my question come from.
The Admin: anything regarding to the session today or the assignment assignment is very clear. There are four prompts. You need to make a system that has memory pi perception decision action plus agent six loop. it takes the four prompts and gives the final result. Now all the four targets must produce correct final answers. The memory must persist across the runs inside the state folder. So if you go am I maintaining a I'm mainting a State older. Here's What is the memory right now? My memory says crashpad. Okay. Descriptor is This is the outcome for the web search. descriptors get Fair enough. Then kind tool outcome. So I only have tool outcomes stored for in my own case. Artifacts JSON again.
The Admin: Not the whole thing and the bin that I am maintaining completely up to you want to maintain or not. stop one second the four coordinate layers must be each back by type identity contract. The LM gateway v3 must be a substrate of the LM call. The state directory must be cleanable between assignment attempts. So if I now go here and kill it, you're going to be restarting the state. You need to maintain that basically constraint V2 on everybody UV for Python NC server studio. No third party agentic framework. What are you delivering? You are sharing a GitHub repo. I need to see the state directly there. The read me must include the actual terminal output. So I can see what your agents did. The YouTube link that runs through all the four queries. So I actually see that you actually ran it and perception and decision prompt validated by the JSON POP. I will not say what is POP. Right.
The Admin: So this last one There are good scores for this. So just search you can …
Swapnil Gusani: tavly here are you using any AI capabilities of tly or just search links which does we can use any other API also there but
The Admin: if others want to leave you can leave but I'm here for more Q&A. You should be using LM V3 basically.
sandeep hegde: Yeah on so you mentioned something right LLM gateway V3 should be substrate or…
sandeep hegde: something what was that point Okay.
The Admin: LM gateway V3.
Raghu Rammohan: General questions hope it's okay to ask.
The Admin: Yeah. Right.
Raghu Rammohan: You have a LLM gateway router and in the diagram…
Raghu Rammohan: which you showed it automatically selects which LLM to call in certain cases for decision and…
The Admin: F decision.
The Admin: Yes, correct.
Raghu Rammohan: if that call fails then it follows the failover sequence you have specified. So here in this if for example grock was the last in your failover sequence and this gateway v3 picked up grock and if it fails how does it okay okay sure and…
The Admin: classified tiers. second phase, third field, fourth. Correct.
Raghu Rammohan: next question is you mentioned that each provider like cloud codex they have their own architecture and I know whatever you have explained I mean that flow diagram today is maybe early stages of the evolution…
03:50:00
Raghu Rammohan: but is this inspired by any specific source okay so put whatever the best to start off in your opinion like that Okay.
The Admin: No, it is my architecture and…
The Admin: cloud code was leaked and I see that a lot of what they have done is very similar but it's not inspired from something. This is something that I'm intending from since EGV1 and now plugging in updates based on what the architecture is doing the artifact thing is from cloud code.
Raghu Rammohan: And this architecture will be evolving right as you mentioned.
The Admin: Yes. Okay.
Raghu Rammohan: Thank you.
Pandurang Patil: I have two use cases I have two features basically I have two products we have separate agents created for that two different products which gets invoked but it's kind of a QA Q&A questions wherein user goes on instructing that specific agent acting on for that specific product so there are such two agents what I have to do is I have to merge it create a orchestrator or a generalized chat Q&A which can initiate any of the use case of or any of those agents based on whatever generic queries that user is and along with some more generalized query resolutions that user might have.
Pandurang Patil: So if I have to I have these two agents defined. One of the agent is running in JavaScript.
Pandurang Patil: One of the agent is in Python. how do I go about it? there are challenges that we are trying to there are two different agents…
The Admin: no what is the question is JavaScript and…
The Admin: Python mixing or which agent to call that doesn't matter you can call JavaScript from Python from JavaScript Doesn't matter.
Pandurang Patil: which in JavaScript one agent is Python. that is but those are running on a separate layers or separate services…
The Admin: What does it matter?
Pandurang Patil: how do I merge them to create a single agent yeah I'm invoking them separately as of now…
The Admin: You're not merging them. You're calling them separately. Now, correct.
Pandurang Patil: because those are starting points are different what I'm trying to do is now I merge it to a single interface for the user.
The Admin: then decide that you need to write JavaScript or Python and move the one to other.
Pandurang Patil: Okay, even if I do that Okay.
The Admin: once you do that once you make both of them available in a single one so they can write and read the same javascript on same memory what you need to do is to basically write the prompt perception kind of router in your case I'll call a agent router where the prompt itself is that given this query decide which agent need to be
Pandurang Patil: But then once that is done there is some human in loop for every agent it's not that unlike here in this case there is a decision or there is the agent if I am invoking there is no tas individual task like I fire and it gets a response and then I have to loop in again once I invoke that agent there are some subsequent human in loop kind of a iterations that it can go That is…
Pandurang Patil: why the question is.
The Admin: No, then it needs to be part of the prompt itself,…
The Admin: That if he cannot solve it and human in loop is involved and trigger this interface for the human I'll give you one example.
Pandurang Patil: So the router agent that you mentioned that is going to right
The Admin: My company validates the personal information of people. Other groups look at ITR filing. I ask you PAN card please upload one document. You upload your PAN card. If you upload a PAN card, I ask a PAN card agent to start and work. PA PAN card looks at the basic things and then I send an email to human team or there's a UI in which the PAN card comes in and a human is sitting reads the PAN card and says yes all okay and then fills up human in the loop is done. If I team the same thing will happen.
The Admin: IT form will go to the team. They will manually look at it. There needs to be interface for humans to interact that once that is done…
The Admin: then the agent knows yes task is done. So in your case the action or the MCP the human is a tool call…
Pandurang Patil: Okay.
Pandurang Patil: So the conversation history would be combined for both of those agents.
The Admin: because both of them are in a single agentic loop. No again you are an architect you can decide that there are two loops I need to maintain one is a outer loop and…
03:55:00
Pandurang Patil: So that understanding is right that conversation history will be combined. There won't be separate conversation history by Okay, good.
The Admin: second is the inner loop completely up to you okay Gapria is
The Admin: That's okay.
Swapnil Gusani: I had some issues with LLM gateway v2 for the last assignment. sometimes it gave 503 so I couldn't understand was it because I was sending too much context or…
Swapnil Gusani: something and why didn't it fail over when such issues happened? Do you know what is lacking in this?
The Admin: try and…
The Admin: fix that otherwise you'll get three if you should see how much your context is sometimes Geminina just decides not to work with you ideally…
Swapnil Gusani: But then in that case it doesn't just fail over to the next one if that happen.
The Admin: if there's a bug then you can fix
Swapnil Gusani: 
Swapnil Gusani: And I had to actually remove some of them because some of them just won't reply. For Nvidia for example, it will just the times of the day when it just won't reply only actually people.
The Admin: the maintain your own LM gateway that is working with for me you see that it is actually just moving to GitHub and…
Swapnil Gusani: Okay.
The Admin: Gemini it's not even going to others even called for
The Admin: The last three days.
Swapnil Gusani: But in your case there is a gap between both of them. So is it passing through them or it is just deciding later on from stats that this is not working is it failing over all of them and…
The Admin: What do you mean?
Swapnil Gusani: reaching GitHub or is it maintaining some numbers as which is more successful.
The Admin: Router is deciding which one to call.
Swapnil Gusani: the router in England.
The Admin: Okay. GP Rahul.
Rahul Kumar: Hi Ron. Yeah. Can I ask now related to assignment not The previous one.
The Admin: Yes, please.
Rahul Kumar: When I tell you what I was trying to do it I was trying to extract the tweets of the five personality okay like Elon Musk okay and satanada and the different persons. And I wanted to see how many tweets per day on an average they are doing In one quarter. And then there the week wise how many tweets they are doing. So some kind of the statistics I wanted to do it and so to but I was using the Google anti-gravity. And it took my almost four five hours but it did not Keep on running in the loop and all. Okay.
The Admin: Yeah, Twitter does not provide the API to just scrape it.
Rahul Kumar: or Twitter does not provide API to call it then.
The Admin: Yeah, Twitter doesn't allow anyone to scrape it.
Swapnil Gusani: There is a paid API for your
Rahul Kumar: I need to use the paid API for the Twitter. And that's…
The Admin: Is that good?
Rahul Kumar: what I think it's keep on doing.
Rahul Kumar: Then I had to finally pay for this Gemini also.
The Admin: Any other question?
Rahul Kumar: Because all the prelim code have so I cannot use the twitter right for the pay for it better to do other assignment.
The Admin: Any other question? Pay for it. Yeah. Not free.
Rahul Kumar: Okay. Thank you.
Sagar Shete: This is a question for basically understanding…
The Admin: Three $3 per month.
Sagar Shete: how much infrastructure is required to run a plot code level agent at a server level like how much of a consumer you want to make your own plot code Okay.
The Admin: $3 per month of infrastructure excluding the co API.
Sagar Shete: You're including are you including the computer
The Admin: I'm including the compute and storage excluding the cost of LM call around $3 to $4 per month. Okay.
Sagar Shete: Okay, thanks.
The Admin: Go ahead.
Nitha Anna Rajan: Yeah, I have a question regarding that flow chart. can you please bring up that slide?
04:00:00
The Admin: Great. H.
Nitha Anna Rajan: 
Nitha Anna Rajan: Yeah, just yeah. the perception it breaks down the task into multiple goals and depending on the goals whether the decision directly answers or it invokes a tool right. So when the decision directly answers how does it know that job is done?
The Admin: Who the history?
Nitha Anna Rajan: perception. How does it know? Because only when the tool is getting Can you come?
The Admin: You said the history.
Nitha Anna Rajan: Okay. Okay. Thank you.
The Admin: All right.
The Admin: long sessions. I'm going to stop the recording, but I'm still here just in case you want to ask more questions.
Ammar Adil: Roan, just one question. when you say $3, can you just elaborate? how can it be $3? what is the employee you are referring to?
The Admin: That's a smaller server that you need per month.
Meeting ended after 04:01:03 👋
This editable transcript was computer generated and might contain errors. People can also change the text after it was created.

